amefaced feeling that her voice would
quiver and break again.

“Jesus said unto her, thy brother shall rise again.

“Martha saith unto Him, I know that he shall rise again in the
resurrection, at the last day.

“Jesus said unto her, I am the resurrection and the life: he that
believeth in Me though he were dead, yet shall he live.

“And whosoever liveth and believeth in Me shall never die. Believest
thou this?

“She saith unto Him,”

(And drawing a painful breath, Sonia read distinctly and forcibly as
though she were making a public confession of faith.)

“Yea, Lord: I believe that Thou art the Christ, the Son of God Which
should come into the world.”

She stopped and looked up quickly at him, but controlling herself went
on reading. Raskolnikov sat without moving, his elbows on the table and
his eyes turned away. She read to the thirty-second verse.

“Then when Mary was come where Jesus was and saw Him, she fell down at
His feet, saying unto Him, Lord if Thou hadst been here, my brother had
not died.

“When Jesus therefore saw her weeping, and the Jews also weeping which
came with her, He groaned in the spirit and was troubled,

“And said, Where have ye laid him? They said unto Him, Lord, come and
see.

“Jesus wept.

“Then said the Jews, behold how He loved him!

“And some of them said, could not this Man which opened the eyes of the
blind, have caused that even this man should not have died?”

Raskolnikov turned and looked at her with emotion. Yes, he had known it!
She was trembling in a real physical fever. He had expected it. She was
getting near the story of the greatest miracle and a feeling of immense
triumph came over her. Her voice rang out like a bell; triumph and joy
gave it power. The lines danced before her eyes, but she knew what she
was reading by heart. At the last verse “Could not this Man which opened
the eyes of the blind...” dropping her voice she passionately reproduced
the doubt, the reproach and censure of the blind disbelieving Jews, who
in another moment would fall at His feet as though struck by
thunder, sobbing and believing.... “And _he, he_--too, is blinded and
unbelieving, he, too, will hear, he, too, will believe, yes, yes! At
once, now,” was what she was dreaming, and she was quivering with happy
anticipation.

“Jesus therefore again groaning in Himself cometh to the grave. It was a
cave, and a stone lay upon it.

“Jesus said, Take ye away the stone. Martha, the sister of him that was
dead, saith unto Him, Lord by this time he stinketh: for he hath been
dead four days.”

She laid emphasis on the word _four_.

“Jesus saith unto her, Said I not unto thee that if thou wouldest
believe, thou shouldest see the glory of God?

“Then they took away the stone from the place where the dead was laid.
And Jesus lifted up His eyes and said, Father, I thank Thee that Thou
hast heard Me.

“And I knew that Thou hearest Me always; but because of the people which
stand by I said it, that they may believe that Thou hast sent Me.

“And when He thus had spoken, He cried with a loud voice, Lazarus, come
forth.

“And he that was dead came forth.”

(She read loudly, cold and trembling with ecstasy, as though she were
seeing it before her eyes.)

“Bound hand and foot with graveclothes; and his face was bound about
with a napkin. Jesus saith unto them, Loose him and let him go.

“Then many of the Jews which came to Mary and had seen the things which
Jesus did believed on Him.”

She could read no more, closed the book and got up from her chair
quickly.

“That is all about the raising of Lazarus,” she whispered severely and
abruptly, and turning away she stood motionless, not daring to raise
her eyes to him. She still trembled feverishly. The candle-end was
flickering out in the battered candlestick, dimly lighting up in the
poverty-stricken room the murderer and the harlot who had so strangely
been reading together the eterna