promises could not lie. Full of
these thoughts and anxieties, they ascended a rising ground wherefrom
they descried their own village, at the sight of which Sancho fell on
his knees exclaiming, “Open thine eyes, longed-for home, and see how
thy son Sancho Panza comes back to thee, if not very rich, very well
whipped! Open thine arms and receive, too, thy son Don Quixote, who, if
he comes vanquished by the arm of another, comes victor over himself,
which, as he himself has told me, is the greatest victory anyone can
desire. I’m bringing back money, for if I was well whipped, I went
mounted like a gentleman.”



p72b.jpg (375K)

Full Size



“Have done with these fooleries,” said Don Quixote; “let us push on
straight and get to our own place, where we will give free range to our
fancies, and settle our plans for our future pastoral life.”

With this they descended the slope and directed their steps to their
village.



p72e.jpg (35K)



CHAPTER LXXIII.
OF THE OMENS DON QUIXOTE HAD AS HE ENTERED HIS OWN VILLAGE, AND OTHER
INCIDENTS THAT EMBELLISH AND GIVE A COLOUR TO THIS GREAT HISTORY




p73a.jpg (141K)

Full Size



At the entrance of the village, so says Cide Hamete, Don Quixote saw
two boys quarrelling on the village threshing-floor, one of whom said
to the other, “Take it easy, Periquillo; thou shalt never see it again
as long as thou livest.”

Don Quixote heard this, and said he to Sancho, “Dost thou not mark,
friend, what that boy said, ‘Thou shalt never see it again as long as
thou livest’?”

“Well,” said Sancho, “what does it matter if the boy said so?”

“What!” said Don Quixote, “dost thou not see that, applied to the
object of my desires, the words mean that I am never to see Dulcinea
more?”

Sancho was about to answer, when his attention was diverted by seeing a
hare come flying across the plain pursued by several greyhounds and
sportsmen. In its terror it ran to take shelter and hide itself under
Dapple. Sancho caught it alive and presented it to Don Quixote, who was
saying, “_Malum signum, malum signum!_ a hare flies, greyhounds chase
it, Dulcinea appears not.”

“Your worship’s a strange man,” said Sancho; “let’s take it for granted
that this hare is Dulcinea, and these greyhounds chasing it the
malignant enchanters who turned her into a country wench; she flies,
and I catch her and put her into your worship’s hands, and you hold her
in your arms and cherish her; what bad sign is that, or what ill omen
is there to be found here?”

The two boys who had been quarrelling came over to look at the hare,
and Sancho asked one of them what their quarrel was about. He was
answered by the one who had said, “Thou shalt never see it again as
long as thou livest,” that he had taken a cage full of crickets from
the other boy, and did not mean to give it back to him as long as he
lived. Sancho took out four cuartos from his pocket and gave them to
the boy for the cage, which he placed in Don Quixote’s hands, saying,
“There, señor! there are the omens broken and destroyed, and they have
no more to do with our affairs, to my thinking, fool as I am, than with
last year’s clouds; and if I remember rightly I have heard the curate
of our village say that it does not become Christians or sensible
people to give any heed to these silly things; and even you yourself
said the same to me some time ago, telling me that all Christians who
minded omens were fools; but there’s no need of making words about it;
let us push on and go into our village.”

The sportsmen came up and asked for their hare, which Don Quixote gave
them. They then went on, and upon the green at the entrance of the town
they came upon the curate and the bachelor Samson Carrasco busy with
their breviaries. It should be mentioned that Sancho had thrown, by way
of a sumpter-cloth, over Dapple and over the bundle of armour, the
buckram robe painted with flames which they had put upon