selled, that would fetch a crown any day.”

At this Don Quixote could not keep himself from answering; and
interposing between the two, and separating them, he placed the
pack-saddle on the ground, to lie there in sight until the truth was
established, and said, “Your worships may perceive clearly and plainly
the error under which this worthy squire lies when he calls a basin
which was, is, and shall be the helmet of Mambrino which I won from him
in fair war, and made myself master of by legitimate and lawful
possession. With the pack-saddle I do not concern myself; but I may
tell you on that head that my squire Sancho asked my permission to
strip off the caparison of this vanquished poltroon’s steed, and with
it adorn his own; I allowed him, and he took it; and as to its having
been changed from a caparison into a pack-saddle, I can give no
explanation except the usual one, that such transformations will take
place in adventures of chivalry. To confirm all which, run, Sancho my
son, and fetch hither the helmet which this good fellow calls a basin.”

“Egad, master,” said Sancho, “if we have no other proof of our case
than what your worship puts forward, Mambrino’s helmet is just as much
a basin as this good fellow’s caparison is a pack-saddle.”

“Do as I bid thee,” said Don Quixote; “it cannot be that everything in
this castle goes by enchantment.”

Sancho hastened to where the basin was, and brought it back with him,
and when Don Quixote saw it, he took hold of it and said:

“Your worships may see with what a face this squire can assert that
this is a basin and not the helmet I told you of; and I swear by the
order of chivalry I profess, that this helmet is the identical one I
took from him, without anything added to or taken from it.”

“There is no doubt of that,” said Sancho, “for from the time my master
won it until now he has only fought one battle in it, when he let loose
those unlucky men in chains; and if it had not been for this
basin-helmet he would not have come off over well that time, for there
was plenty of stone-throwing in that affair.”



c44e.jpg (13K)



CHAPTER XLV.
IN WHICH THE DOUBTFUL QUESTION OF MAMBRINO’S HELMET AND THE PACK-SADDLE
IS FINALLY SETTLED, WITH OTHER ADVENTURES THAT OCCURRED IN TRUTH AND
EARNEST




c45a.jpg (154K)

Full Size




“What do you think now, gentlemen,” said the barber, “of what these
gentles say, when they want to make out that this is a helmet?”

“And whoever says the contrary,” said Don Quixote, “I will let him know
he lies if he is a knight, and if he is a squire that he lies again a
thousand times.”

Our own barber, who was present at all this, and understood Don
Quixote’s humour so thoroughly, took it into his head to back up his
delusion and carry on the joke for the general amusement; so addressing
the other barber he said:

“Señor barber, or whatever you are, you must know that I belong to your
profession too, and have had a licence to practise for more than twenty
years, and I know the implements of the barber craft, every one of
them, perfectly well; and I was likewise a soldier for some time in the
days of my youth, and I know also what a helmet is, and a morion, and a
headpiece with a visor, and other things pertaining to soldiering, I
meant to say to soldiers’ arms; and I say—saving better opinions and
always with submission to sounder judgments—that this piece we have now
before us, which this worthy gentleman has in his hands, not only is no
barber’s basin, but is as far from being one as white is from black,
and truth from falsehood; I say, moreover, that this, although it is a
helmet, is not a complete helmet.”

“Certainly not,” said Don Quixote, “for half of it is wanting, that is
to say the beaver.”

“It is quite true,” said the curate, who saw the object of his friend
the barber; and Cardenio, Don Fernando and his companions agreed with
him, and even the Judge, if his t