our memory much better and more forcibly than things past.”

These observations which Sancho makes here are the other ones on
account of which the translator says he regards this chapter as
apocryphal, inasmuch as they are beyond Sancho’s capacity.

“Whence it arises,” he continued, “that when we see any person well
dressed and making a figure with rich garments and retinue of servants,
it seems to lead and impel us perforce to respect him, though memory
may at the same moment recall to us some lowly condition in which we
have seen him, but which, whether it may have been poverty or low
birth, being now a thing of the past, has no existence; while the only
thing that has any existence is what we see before us; and if this
person whom fortune has raised from his original lowly state (these
were the very words the padre used) to his present height of
prosperity, be well bred, generous, courteous to all, without seeking
to vie with those whose nobility is of ancient date, depend upon it,
Teresa, no one will remember what he was, and everyone will respect
what he is, except indeed the envious, from whom no fair fortune is
safe.”

“I do not understand you, husband,” replied Teresa; “do as you like,
and don’t break my head with any more speechifying and rethoric; and if
you have revolved to do what you say—”

“Resolved, you should say, woman,” said Sancho, “not revolved.”

“Don’t set yourself to wrangle with me, husband,” said Teresa; “I speak
as God pleases, and don’t deal in out-of-the-way phrases; and I say if
you are bent upon having a government, take your son Sancho with you,
and teach him from this time on how to hold a government; for sons
ought to inherit and learn the trades of their fathers.”

“As soon as I have the government,” said Sancho, “I will send for him
by post, and I will send thee money, of which I shall have no lack, for
there is never any want of people to lend it to governors when they
have not got it; and do thou dress him so as to hide what he is and
make him look what he is to be.”

“You send the money,” said Teresa, “and I’ll dress him up for you as
fine as you please.”

“Then we are agreed that our daughter is to be a countess,” said
Sancho.

“The day that I see her a countess,” replied Teresa, “it will be the
same to me as if I was burying her; but once more I say do as you
please, for we women are born to this burden of being obedient to our
husbands, though they be dogs;” and with this she began to weep in
earnest, as if she already saw Sanchica dead and buried.

Sancho consoled her by saying that though he must make her a countess,
he would put it off as long as possible. Here their conversation came
to an end, and Sancho went back to see Don Quixote, and make
arrangements for their departure.



p05e.jpg (49K)

Full Size



CHAPTER VI.
OF WHAT TOOK PLACE BETWEEN DON QUIXOTE AND HIS NIECE AND HOUSEKEEPER;
ONE OF THE MOST IMPORTANT CHAPTERS IN THE WHOLE HISTORY




p06a.jpg (93K)

Full Size



While Sancho Panza and his wife, Teresa Cascajo, held the above
irrelevant conversation, Don Quixote’s niece and housekeeper were not
idle, for by a thousand signs they began to perceive that their uncle
and master meant to give them the slip the third time, and once more
betake himself to his, for them, ill-errant chivalry. They strove by
all the means in their power to divert him from such an unlucky scheme;
but it was all preaching in the desert and hammering cold iron.
Nevertheless, among many other representations made to him, the
housekeeper said to him, “In truth, master, if you do not keep still
and stay quiet at home, and give over roaming mountains and valleys
like a troubled spirit, looking for what they say are called
adventures, but what I call misfortunes, I shall have to make complaint
to God and the king with loud supplication to send some remedy.”

To which Don Quixote replied, “What answer God will give 