

“I may well ask the same, señora,” said Don Quixote; “and I do ask
whether I shall be safe from being assailed and forced?”

“Of whom and against whom do you demand that security, sir knight?”
said the duenna.

“Of you and against you I ask it,” said Don Quixote; “for I am not
marble, nor are you brass, nor is it now ten o’clock in the morning,
but midnight, or a trifle past it I fancy, and we are in a room more
secluded and retired than the cave could have been where the
treacherous and daring Æneas enjoyed the fair soft-hearted Dido. But
give me your hand, señora; I require no better protection than my own
continence, and my own sense of propriety; as well as that which is
inspired by that venerable head-dress;” and so saying he kissed her
right hand and took it in his own, she yielding it to him with equal
ceremoniousness. And here Cide Hamete inserts a parenthesis in which he
says that to have seen the pair marching from the door to the bed,
linked hand in hand in this way, he would have given the best of the
two tunics he had.

Don Quixote finally got into bed, and Doña Rodriguez took her seat on a
chair at some little distance from his couch, without taking off her
spectacles or putting aside the candle. Don Quixote wrapped the
bedclothes round him and covered himself up completely, leaving nothing
but his face visible, and as soon as they had both regained their
composure he broke silence, saying, “Now, Señora Doña Rodriguez, you
may unbosom yourself and out with everything you have in your sorrowful
heart and afflicted bowels; and by me you shall be listened to with
chaste ears, and aided by compassionate exertions.”

“I believe it,” replied the duenna; “from your worship’s gentle and
winning presence only such a Christian answer could be expected. The
fact is, then, Señor Don Quixote, that though you see me seated in this
chair, here in the middle of the kingdom of Aragon, and in the attire
of a despised outcast duenna, I am from the Asturias of Oviedo, and of
a family with which many of the best of the province are connected by
blood; but my untoward fate and the improvidence of my parents, who, I
know not how, were unseasonably reduced to poverty, brought me to the
court of Madrid, where as a provision and to avoid greater misfortunes,
my parents placed me as seamstress in the service of a lady of quality,
and I would have you know that for hemming and sewing I have never been
surpassed by any all my life. My parents left me in service and
returned to their own country, and a few years later went, no doubt, to
heaven, for they were excellent good Catholic Christians. I was left an
orphan with nothing but the miserable wages and trifling presents that
are given to servants of my sort in palaces; but about this time,
without any encouragement on my part, one of the esquires of the
household fell in love with me, a man somewhat advanced in years,
full-bearded and personable, and above all as good a gentleman as the
king himself, for he came of a mountain stock. We did not carry on our
loves with such secrecy but that they came to the knowledge of my lady,
and she, not to have any fuss about it, had us married with the full
sanction of the holy mother Roman Catholic Church, of which marriage a
daughter was born to put an end to my good fortune, if I had any; not
that I died in childbirth, for I passed through it safely and in due
season, but because shortly afterwards my husband died of a certain
shock he received, and had I time to tell you of it I know your worship
would be surprised;” and here she began to weep bitterly and said,
“Pardon me, Señor Don Quixote, if I am unable to control myself, for
every time I think of my unfortunate husband my eyes fill up with
tears. God bless me, with what an air of dignity he used to carry my
lady behind him on a stout mule as black as jet! for in those days they
did not use coaches or chairs, as they say they do n