mbruno,
though thou art an enchanter, thou art true to thy promises. Send us
now the peerless Clavileño, that our misfortune may be brought to an
end; for if the hot weather sets in and these beards of ours are still
there, alas for our lot!”

The Trifaldi said this in such a pathetic way that she drew tears from
the eyes of all and even Sancho’s filled up; and he resolved in his
heart to accompany his master to the uttermost ends of the earth, if so
be the removal of the wool from those venerable countenances depended
upon it.



p40e.jpg (13K)



CHAPTER XLI.
OF THE ARRIVAL OF CLAVILEÑO AND THE END OF THIS PROTRACTED ADVENTURE




p41a.jpg (138K)

Full Size



And now night came, and with it the appointed time for the arrival of
the famous horse Clavileño, the non-appearance of which was already
beginning to make Don Quixote uneasy, for it struck him that, as
Malambruno was so long about sending it, either he himself was not the
knight for whom the adventure was reserved, or else Malambruno did not
dare to meet him in single combat. But lo! suddenly there came into the
garden four wild-men all clad in green ivy bearing on their shoulders a
great wooden horse. They placed it on its feet on the ground, and one
of the wild-men said, “Let the knight who has heart for it mount this
machine.”

Here Sancho exclaimed, “I don’t mount, for neither have I the heart nor
am I a knight.”

“And let the squire, if he has one,” continued the wild-man, “take his
seat on the croup, and let him trust the valiant Malambruno; for by no
sword save his, nor by the malice of any other, shall he be assailed.
It is but to turn this peg the horse has in his neck, and he will bear
them through the air to where Malambruno awaits them; but lest the vast
elevation of their course should make them giddy, their eyes must be
covered until the horse neighs, which will be the sign of their having
completed their journey.”

With these words, leaving Clavileño behind them, they retired with easy
dignity the way they came. As soon as the Distressed One saw the horse,
almost in tears she exclaimed to Don Quixote, “Valiant knight, the
promise of Malambruno has proved trustworthy; the horse has come, our
beards are growing, and by every hair in them all of us implore thee to
shave and shear us, as it is only mounting him with thy squire and
making a happy beginning with your new journey.”

“That I will, Señora Countess Trifaldi,” said Don Quixote, “most gladly
and with right goodwill, without stopping to take a cushion or put on
my spurs, so as not to lose time, such is my desire to see you and all
these duennas shaved clean.”

“That I won’t,” said Sancho, “with good-will or bad-will, or any way at
all; and if this shaving can’t be done without my mounting on the
croup, my master had better look out for another squire to go with him,
and these ladies for some other way of making their faces smooth; I’m
no witch to have a taste for travelling through the air. What would my
islanders say when they heard their governor was going, strolling about
on the winds? And another thing, as it is three thousand and odd
leagues from this to Kandy, if the horse tires, or the giant takes
huff, we’ll be half a dozen years getting back, and there won’t be isle
or island in the world that will know me: and so, as it is a common
saying ‘in delay there’s danger,’ and ‘when they offer thee a heifer
run with a halter,’ these ladies’ beards must excuse me; ‘Saint Peter
is very well in Rome;’ I mean I am very well in this house where so
much is made of me, and I hope for such a good thing from the master as
to see myself a governor.”

“Friend Sancho,” said the duke at this, “the island that I have
promised you is not a moving one, or one that will run away; it has
roots so deeply buried in the bowels of the earth that it will be no
easy matter to pluck it up or shift it from where it is; you know as
well as