from the
hands of Zoraida’s father, and the napkin from his mouth; but the
renegade once more told him not to utter a word, or they would take his
life. He, when he saw his daughter there, began to sigh piteously, and
still more when he perceived that I held her closely embraced and that
she lay quiet without resisting or complaining, or showing any
reluctance; nevertheless he remained silent lest they should carry into
effect the repeated threats the renegade had addressed to him.

Finding herself now on board, and that we were about to give way with
the oars, Zoraida, seeing her father there, and the other Moors bound,
bade the renegade ask me to do her the favour of releasing the Moors
and setting her father at liberty, for she would rather drown herself
in the sea than suffer a father that had loved her so dearly to be
carried away captive before her eyes and on her account. The renegade
repeated this to me, and I replied that I was very willing to do so;
but he replied that it was not advisable, because if they were left
there they would at once raise the country and stir up the city, and
lead to the despatch of swift cruisers in pursuit, and our being taken,
by sea or land, without any possibility of escape; and that all that
could be done was to set them free on the first Christian ground we
reached. On this point we all agreed; and Zoraida, to whom it was
explained, together with the reasons that prevented us from doing at
once what she desired, was satisfied likewise; and then in glad silence
and with cheerful alacrity each of our stout rowers took his oar, and
commending ourselves to God with all our hearts, we began to shape our
course for the island of Majorca, the nearest Christian land. Owing,
however, to the Tramontana rising a little, and the sea growing
somewhat rough, it was impossible for us to keep a straight course for
Majorca, and we were compelled to coast in the direction of Oran, not
without great uneasiness on our part lest we should be observed from
the town of Shershel, which lies on that coast, not more than sixty
miles from Algiers. Moreover we were afraid of meeting on that course
one of the galliots that usually come with goods from Tetuan; although
each of us for himself and all of us together felt confident that, if
we were to meet a merchant galliot, so that it were not a cruiser, not
only should we not be lost, but that we should take a vessel in which
we could more safely accomplish our voyage. As we pursued our course
Zoraida kept her head between my hands so as not to see her father, and
I felt that she was praying to Lela Marien to help us.



c41d.jpg (266K)

Full Size




We might have made about thirty miles when daybreak found us some three
musket-shots off the land, which seemed to us deserted, and without
anyone to see us. For all that, however, by hard rowing we put out a
little to sea, for it was now somewhat calmer, and having gained about
two leagues the word was given to row by batches, while we ate
something, for the vessel was well provided; but the rowers said it was
not a time to take any rest; let food be served out to those who were
not rowing, but they would not leave their oars on any account. This
was done, but now a stiff breeze began to blow, which obliged us to
leave off rowing and make sail at once and steer for Oran, as it was
impossible to make any other course. All this was done very promptly,
and under sail we ran more than eight miles an hour without any fear,
except that of coming across some vessel out on a roving expedition. We
gave the Moorish rowers some food, and the renegade comforted them by
telling them that they were not held as captives, as we should set them
free on the first opportunity.

The same was said to Zoraida’s father, who replied, “Anything else,
Christian, I might hope for or think likely from your generosity and
good behaviour, but do not think me so simple as to imag