your own skull.”

The young man went his way, and the governor continued his round, and
shortly afterwards two tipstaffs came up with a man in custody, and
said, “Señor governor, this person, who seems to be a man, is not so,
but a woman, and not an ill-favoured one, in man’s clothes.” They
raised two or three lanterns to her face, and by their light they
distinguished the features of a woman to all appearance of the age of
sixteen or a little more, with her hair gathered into a gold and green
silk net, and fair as a thousand pearls. They scanned her from head to
foot, and observed that she had on red silk stockings with garters of
white taffety bordered with gold and pearl; her breeches were of green
and gold stuff, and under an open jacket or jerkin of the same she wore
a doublet of the finest white and gold cloth; her shoes were white and
such as men wear; she carried no sword at her belt, but only a richly
ornamented dagger, and on her fingers she had several handsome rings.
In short, the girl seemed fair to look at in the eyes of all, and none
of those who beheld her knew her, the people of the town said they
could not imagine who she was, and those who were in on the secret of
the jokes that were to be practised upon Sancho were the ones who were
most surprised, for this incident or discovery had not been arranged by
them; and they watched anxiously to see how the affair would end.

Sancho was fascinated by the girl’s beauty, and he asked her who she
was, where she was going, and what had induced her to dress herself in
that garb. She with her eyes fixed on the ground answered in modest
confusion, “I cannot tell you, señor, before so many people what it is
of such consequence to me to have kept secret; one thing I wish to be
known, that I am no thief or evildoer, but only an unhappy maiden whom
the power of jealousy has led to break through the respect that is due
to modesty.”

Hearing this the majordomo said to Sancho, “Make the people stand back,
señor governor, that this lady may say what she wishes with less
embarrassment.”

Sancho gave the order, and all except the majordomo, the head-carver,
and the secretary fell back. Finding herself then in the presence of no
more, the damsel went on to say, “I am the daughter, sirs, of Pedro
Perez Mazorca, the wool-farmer of this town, who is in the habit of
coming very often to my father’s house.”

“That won’t do, señora,” said the majordomo; “for I know Pedro Perez
very well, and I know he has no child at all, either son or daughter;
and besides, though you say he is your father, you add then that he
comes very often to your father’s house.”

“I had already noticed that,” said Sancho.

“I am confused just now, sirs,” said the damsel, “and I don’t know what
I am saying; but the truth is that I am the daughter of Diego de la
Llana, whom you must all know.”

“Ay, that will do,” said the majordomo; “for I know Diego de la Llana,
and know that he is a gentleman of position and a rich man, and that he
has a son and a daughter, and that since he was left a widower nobody
in all this town can speak of having seen his daughter’s face; for he
keeps her so closely shut up that he does not give even the sun a
chance of seeing her; and for all that report says she is extremely
beautiful.”

“It is true,” said the damsel, “and I am that daughter; whether report
lies or not as to my beauty, you, sirs, will have decided by this time,
as you have seen me;” and with this she began to weep bitterly.

On seeing this the secretary leant over to the head-carver’s ear, and
said to him in a low voice, “Something serious has no doubt happened
this poor maiden, that she goes wandering from home in such a dress and
at such an hour, and one of her rank too.” “There can be no doubt about
it,” returned the carver, “and moreover her tears confirm your
suspicion.” Sancho gave her the best comfort he could, and entreated
her to tell them w