ainst one another on the hollow side make a noise which, if
not very pleasing or harmonious, is not disagreeable and accords very
well with the rude notes of the bagpipe and tabor. The word albogue is
Morisco, as are all those in our Spanish tongue that begin with _al;_
for example, _almohaza, almorzar, alhombra, alguacil, alhucema,
almacen, alcancia_, and others of the same sort, of which there are not
many more; our language has only three that are Morisco and end in _i_,
which are _borceguí, zaquizamí_, and _maravedí. Alhelí_ and _alfaquí_
are seen to be Arabic, as well by the _al_ at the beginning as by the
_í_ they end with. I mention this incidentally, the chance allusion to
albogues having reminded me of it; and it will be of great assistance
to us in the perfect practice of this calling that I am something of a
poet, as thou knowest, and that besides the bachelor Samson Carrasco is
an accomplished one. Of the curate I say nothing; but I will wager he
has some spice of the poet in him, and no doubt Master Nicholas too,
for all barbers, or most of them, are guitar players and stringers of
verses. I will bewail my separation; thou shalt glorify thyself as a
constant lover; the shepherd Carrascon will figure as a rejected one,
and the curate Curiambro as whatever may please him best; and so all
will go as gaily as heart could wish.”

To this Sancho made answer, “I am so unlucky, señor, that I’m afraid
the day will never come when I’ll see myself at such a calling. O what
neat spoons I’ll make when I’m a shepherd! What messes, creams,
garlands, pastoral odds and ends! And if they don’t get me a name for
wisdom, they’ll not fail to get me one for ingenuity. My daughter
Sanchica will bring us our dinner to the pasture. But stay—she’s
good-looking, and shepherds there are with more mischief than
simplicity in them; I would not have her ‘come for wool and go back
shorn;’ love-making and lawless desires are just as common in the
fields as in the cities, and in shepherds’ shanties as in royal
palaces; ‘do away with the cause, you do away with the sin;’ ‘if eyes
don’t see hearts don’t break’ and ‘better a clear escape than good
men’s prayers.’”

“A truce to thy proverbs, Sancho,” exclaimed Don Quixote; “any one of
those thou hast uttered would suffice to explain thy meaning; many a
time have I recommended thee not to be so lavish with proverbs and to
exercise some moderation in delivering them; but it seems to me it is
only ‘preaching in the desert;’ ‘my mother beats me and I go on with my
tricks.”

“It seems to me,” said Sancho, “that your worship is like the common
saying, ‘Said the frying-pan to the kettle, Get away, blackbreech.’ You
chide me for uttering proverbs, and you string them in couples
yourself.”

“Observe, Sancho,” replied Don Quixote, “I bring in proverbs to the
purpose, and when I quote them they fit like a ring to the finger; thou
bringest them in by the head and shoulders, in such a way that thou
dost drag them in, rather than introduce them; if I am not mistaken, I
have told thee already that proverbs are short maxims drawn from the
experience and observation of our wise men of old; but the proverb that
is not to the purpose is a piece of nonsense and not a maxim. But
enough of this; as nightfall is drawing on let us retire some little
distance from the high road to pass the night; what is in store for us
to-morrow God knoweth.”

They turned aside, and supped late and poorly, very much against
Sancho’s will, who turned over in his mind the hardships attendant upon
knight-errantry in woods and forests, even though at times plenty
presented itself in castles and houses, as at Don Diego de Miranda’s,
at the wedding of Camacho the Rich, and at Don Antonio Moreno’s; he
reflected, however, that it could not be always day, nor always night;
and so that night he passed in sleeping, and his master in waking.



p67e.jpg (55K)



CHAPTER LXVIII.
OF 