his hiding-place, Camilla and Leonela
entered the closet, and the instant she set foot within it Camilla
said, with a deep sigh, “Ah! dear Leonela, would it not be better,
before I do what I am unwilling you should know lest you should seek to
prevent it, that you should take Anselmo’s dagger that I have asked of
you and with it pierce this vile heart of mine? But no; there is no
reason why I should suffer the punishment of another’s fault. I will
first know what it is that the bold licentious eyes of Lothario have
seen in me that could have encouraged him to reveal to me a design so
base as that which he has disclosed regardless of his friend and of my
honour. Go to the window, Leonela, and call him, for no doubt he is in
the street waiting to carry out his vile project; but mine, cruel it
may be, but honourable, shall be carried out first.”

“Ah, señora,” said the crafty Leonela, who knew her part, “what is it
you want to do with this dagger? Can it be that you mean to take your
own life, or Lothario’s? for whichever you mean to do, it will lead to
the loss of your reputation and good name. It is better to dissemble
your wrong and not give this wicked man the chance of entering the
house now and finding us alone; consider, señora, we are weak women and
he is a man, and determined, and as he comes with such a base purpose,
blind and urged by passion, perhaps before you can put yours into
execution he may do what will be worse for you than taking your life.
Ill betide my master, Anselmo, for giving such authority in his house
to this shameless fellow! And supposing you kill him, señora, as I
suspect you mean to do, what shall we do with him when he is dead?”

“What, my friend?” replied Camilla, “we shall leave him for Anselmo to
bury him; for in reason it will be to him a light labour to hide his
own infamy under ground. Summon him, make haste, for all the time I
delay in taking vengeance for my wrong seems to me an offence against
the loyalty I owe my husband.”

Anselmo was listening to all this, and every word that Camilla uttered
made him change his mind; but when he heard that it was resolved to
kill Lothario his first impulse was to come out and show himself to
avert such a disaster; but in his anxiety to see the issue of a
resolution so bold and virtuous he restrained himself, intending to
come forth in time to prevent the deed. At this moment Camilla,
throwing herself upon a bed that was close by, swooned away, and
Leonela began to weep bitterly, exclaiming, “Woe is me! that I should
be fated to have dying here in my arms the flower of virtue upon earth,
the crown of true wives, the pattern of chastity!” with more to the
same effect, so that anyone who heard her would have taken her for the
most tender-hearted and faithful handmaid in the world, and her
mistress for another persecuted Penelope.

Camilla was not long in recovering from her fainting fit and on coming
to herself she said, “Why do you not go, Leonela, to call hither that
friend, the falsest to his friend the sun ever shone upon or night
concealed? Away, run, haste, speed! lest the fire of my wrath burn
itself out with delay, and the righteous vengeance that I hope for melt
away in menaces and maledictions.”

“I am just going to call him, señora,” said Leonela; “but you must
first give me that dagger, lest while I am gone you should by means of
it give cause to all who love you to weep all their lives.”

“Go in peace, dear Leonela, I will not do so,” said Camilla, “for rash
and foolish as I may be, to your mind, in defending my honour, I am not
going to be so much so as that Lucretia who they say killed herself
without having done anything wrong, and without having first killed him
on whom the guilt of her misfortune lay. I shall die, if I am to die;
but it must be after full vengeance upon him who has brought me here to
weep over audacity that no fault of mine gave birth to.”

Leonela require