o go out to receive her,
as she was a countess and a person of rank.

“In respect of her being a countess,” said Sancho, before the duke
could reply, “I am for your highnesses going out to receive her; but in
respect of her being a duenna, it is my opinion you should not stir a
step.”

“Who bade thee meddle in this, Sancho?” said Don Quixote.

“Who, señor?” said Sancho; “I meddle for I have a right to meddle, as a
squire who has learned the rules of courtesy in the school of your
worship, the most courteous and best-bred knight in the whole world of
courtliness; and in these things, as I have heard your worship say, as
much is lost by a card too many as by a card too few, and to one who
has his ears open, few words.”

“Sancho is right,” said the duke; “we’ll see what the countess is like,
and by that measure the courtesy that is due to her.”

And now the drums and fife made their entrance as before; and here the
author brought this short chapter to an end and began the next,
following up the same adventure, which is one of the most notable in
the history.



p37e.jpg (21K)



CHAPTER XXXVIII.
WHEREIN IS TOLD THE DISTRESSED DUENNA’S TALE OF HER MISFORTUNES




p38a.jpg (54K)

Full Size



Following the melancholy musicians there filed into the garden as many
as twelve duennas, in two lines, all dressed in ample mourning robes
apparently of milled serge, with hoods of fine white gauze so long that
they allowed only the border of the robe to be seen. Behind them came
the Countess Trifaldi, the squire Trifaldin of the White Beard leading
her by the hand, clad in the finest unnapped black baize, such that,
had it a nap, every tuft would have shown as big as a Martos chickpea;
the tail, or skirt, or whatever it might be called, ended in three
points which were borne up by the hands of three pages, likewise
dressed in mourning, forming an elegant geometrical figure with the
three acute angles made by the three points, from which all who saw the
peaked skirt concluded that it must be because of it the countess was
called Trifaldi, as though it were Countess of the Three Skirts; and
Benengeli says it was so, and that by her right name she was called the
Countess Lobuna, because wolves bred in great numbers in her country;
and if, instead of wolves, they had been foxes, she would have been
called the Countess Zorruna, as it was the custom in those parts for
lords to take distinctive titles from the thing or things most abundant
in their dominions; this countess, however, in honour of the new
fashion of her skirt, dropped Lobuna and took up Trifaldi.

The twelve duennas and the lady came on at procession pace, their faces
being covered with black veils, not transparent ones like Trifaldin’s,
but so close that they allowed nothing to be seen through them. As soon
as the band of duennas was fully in sight, the duke, the duchess, and
Don Quixote stood up, as well as all who were watching the slow-moving
procession. The twelve duennas halted and formed a lane, along which
the Distressed One advanced, Trifaldin still holding her hand. On
seeing this the duke, the duchess, and Don Quixote went some twelve
paces forward to meet her. She then, kneeling on the ground, said in a
voice hoarse and rough, rather than fine and delicate, “May it please
your highnesses not to offer such courtesies to this your servant, I
should say to this your handmaid, for I am in such distress that I
shall never be able to make a proper return, because my strange and
unparalleled misfortune has carried off my wits, and I know not
whither; but it must be a long way off, for the more I look for them
the less I find them.”

“He would be wanting in wits, señora countess,” said the duke, “who did
not perceive your worth by your person, for at a glance it may be seen
it deserves all the cream of courtesy and flower of polite usage;” and
raising her up by the hand he led her to a seat beside