ed his
niece to give me three ass-colts out of four or five he had at home;”
and he then told them about the loss of Dapple.

The curate consoled him, telling him that when his master was found he
would get him to renew the order, and make a fresh draft on paper, as
was usual and customary; for those made in notebooks were never
accepted or honoured.

Sancho comforted himself with this, and said if that were so the loss
of Dulcinea’s letter did not trouble him much, for he had it almost by
heart, and it could be taken down from him wherever and whenever they
liked.

“Repeat it then, Sancho,” said the barber, “and we will write it down
afterwards.”

Sancho Panza stopped to scratch his head to bring back the letter to
his memory, and balanced himself now on one foot, now the other, one
moment staring at the ground, the next at the sky, and after having
half gnawed off the end of a finger and kept them in suspense waiting
for him to begin, he said, after a long pause, “By God, señor
licentiate, devil a thing can I recollect of the letter; but it said at
the beginning, ‘Exalted and scrubbing Lady.’”

“It cannot have said ‘scrubbing,’” said the barber, “but ‘superhuman’
or ‘sovereign.’”

“That is it,” said Sancho; “then, as well as I remember, it went on,
‘The wounded, and wanting of sleep, and the pierced, kisses your
worship’s hands, ungrateful and very unrecognised fair one; and it said
something or other about health and sickness that he was sending her;
and from that it went tailing off until it ended with ‘Yours till
death, the Knight of the Rueful Countenance.’”

It gave them no little amusement, both of them, to see what a good
memory Sancho had, and they complimented him greatly upon it, and
begged him to repeat the letter a couple of times more, so that they
too might get it by heart to write it out by-and-by. Sancho repeated it
three times, and as he did, uttered three thousand more absurdities;
then he told them more about his master but he never said a word about
the blanketing that had befallen himself in that inn, into which he
refused to enter. He told them, moreover, how his lord, if he brought
him a favourable answer from the lady Dulcinea del Toboso, was to put
himself in the way of endeavouring to become an emperor, or at least a
monarch; for it had been so settled between them, and with his personal
worth and the might of his arm it was an easy matter to come to be one:
and how on becoming one his lord was to make a marriage for him (for he
would be a widower by that time, as a matter of course) and was to give
him as a wife one of the damsels of the empress, the heiress of some
rich and grand state on the mainland, having nothing to do with islands
of any sort, for he did not care for them now. All this Sancho
delivered with so much composure—wiping his nose from time to time—and
with so little common-sense that his two hearers were again filled with
wonder at the force of Don Quixote’s madness that could run away with
this poor man’s reason. They did not care to take the trouble of
disabusing him of his error, as they considered that since it did not
in any way hurt his conscience it would be better to leave him in it,
and they would have all the more amusement in listening to his
simplicities; and so they bade him pray to God for his lord’s health,
as it was a very likely and a very feasible thing for him in course of
time to come to be an emperor, as he said, or at least an archbishop or
some other dignitary of equal rank.

To which Sancho made answer, “If fortune, sirs, should bring things
about in such a way that my master should have a mind, instead of being
an emperor, to be an archbishop, I should like to know what
archbishops-errant commonly give their squires?”

“They commonly give them,” said the curate, some simple benefice or
cure, or some place as sacristan which brings them a good fixed income,
not counting the altar fees, wh