y I would not have allowed thee to go
so far; so as to put a stop to thy long harangue by not listening to
thee I verily suspect that either thou dost not know me, or I do not
know thee; but no, I know well thou art Anselmo, and thou knowest that
I am Lothario; the misfortune is, it seems to me, that thou art not the
Anselmo thou wert, and must have thought that I am not the Lothario I
should be; for the things that thou hast said to me are not those of
that Anselmo who was my friend, nor are those that thou demandest of me
what should be asked of the Lothario thou knowest. True friends will
prove their friends and make use of them, as a poet has said, _usque ad
aras;_ whereby he meant that they will not make use of their friendship
in things that are contrary to God’s will. If this, then, was a
heathen’s feeling about friendship, how much more should it be a
Christian’s, who knows that the divine must not be forfeited for the
sake of any human friendship? And if a friend should go so far as to
put aside his duty to Heaven to fulfil his duty to his friend, it
should not be in matters that are trifling or of little moment, but in
such as affect the friend’s life and honour. Now tell me, Anselmo, in
which of these two art thou imperilled, that I should hazard myself to
gratify thee, and do a thing so detestable as that thou seekest of me?
Neither forsooth; on the contrary, thou dost ask of me, so far as I
understand, to strive and labour to rob thee of honour and life, and to
rob myself of them at the same time; for if I take away thy honour it
is plain I take away thy life, as a man without honour is worse than
dead; and being the instrument, as thou wilt have it so, of so much
wrong to thee, shall not I, too, be left without honour, and
consequently without life? Listen to me, Anselmo my friend, and be not
impatient to answer me until I have said what occurs to me touching the
object of thy desire, for there will be time enough left for thee to
reply and for me to hear.”

“Be it so,” said Anselmo, “say what thou wilt.”

Lothario then went on to say, “It seems to me, Anselmo, that thine is
just now the temper of mind which is always that of the Moors, who can
never be brought to see the error of their creed by quotations from the
Holy Scriptures, or by reasons which depend upon the examination of the
understanding or are founded upon the articles of faith, but must have
examples that are palpable, easy, intelligible, capable of proof, not
admitting of doubt, with mathematical demonstrations that cannot be
denied, like, ‘_If equals be taken from equals, the remainders are
equal:_’ and if they do not understand this in words, and indeed they
do not, it has to be shown to them with the hands, and put before their
eyes, and even with all this no one succeeds in convincing them of the
truth of our holy religion. This same mode of proceeding I shall have
to adopt with thee, for the desire which has sprung up in thee is so
absurd and remote from everything that has a semblance of reason, that
I feel it would be a waste of time to employ it in reasoning with thy
simplicity, for at present I will call it by no other name; and I am
even tempted to leave thee in thy folly as a punishment for thy
pernicious desire; but the friendship I bear thee, which will not allow
me to desert thee in such manifest danger of destruction, keeps me from
dealing so harshly by thee. And that thou mayest clearly see this, say,
Anselmo, hast thou not told me that I must force my suit upon a modest
woman, decoy one that is virtuous, make overtures to one that is
pure-minded, pay court to one that is prudent? Yes, thou hast told me
so. Then, if thou knowest that thou hast a wife, modest, virtuous,
pure-minded and prudent, what is it that thou seekest? And if thou
believest that she will come forth victorious from all my attacks—as
doubtless she would—what higher titles than those she possesses now
dost