ow to a nicety the goats that have crossed over, that if there be
a mistake of one in the reckoning, thou canst not go on with it?”

“No, señor, not a bit,” replied Sancho; “for when I asked your worship
to tell me how many goats had crossed, and you answered you did not
know, at that very instant all I had to say passed away out of my
memory, and, faith, there was much virtue in it, and entertainment.”

“So, then,” said Don Quixote, “the story has come to an end?”

“As much as my mother has,” said Sancho.

“In truth,” said Don Quixote, “thou hast told one of the rarest
stories, tales, or histories, that anyone in the world could have
imagined, and such a way of telling it and ending it was never seen nor
will be in a lifetime; though I expected nothing else from thy
excellent understanding. But I do not wonder, for perhaps those
ceaseless strokes may have confused thy wits.”

“All that may be,” replied Sancho, “but I know that as to my story, all
that can be said is that it ends there where the mistake in the count
of the passage of the goats begins.”

“Let it end where it will, well and good,” said Don Quixote, “and let
us see if Rocinante can go;” and again he spurred him, and again
Rocinante made jumps and remained where he was, so well tied was he.

Just then, whether it was the cold of the morning that was now
approaching, or that he had eaten something laxative at supper, or that
it was only natural (as is most likely), Sancho felt a desire to do
what no one could do for him; but so great was the fear that had
penetrated his heart, he dared not separate himself from his master by
as much as the black of his nail; to escape doing what he wanted was,
however, also impossible; so what he did for peace’s sake was to remove
his right hand, which held the back of the saddle, and with it to untie
gently and silently the running string which alone held up his
breeches, so that on loosening it they at once fell down round his feet
like fetters; he then raised his shirt as well as he could and bared
his hind quarters, no slim ones. But, this accomplished, which he
fancied was all he had to do to get out of this terrible strait and
embarrassment, another still greater difficulty presented itself, for
it seemed to him impossible to relieve himself without making some
noise, and he ground his teeth and squeezed his shoulders together,
holding his breath as much as he could; but in spite of his precautions
he was unlucky enough after all to make a little noise, very different
from that which was causing him so much fear.



c19c.jpg (308K)

Full Size




Don Quixote, hearing it, said, “What noise is that, Sancho?”

“I don’t know, señor,” said he; “it must be something new, for
adventures and misadventures never begin with a trifle.” Once more he
tried his luck, and succeeded so well, that without any further noise
or disturbance he found himself relieved of the burden that had given
him so much discomfort. But as Don Quixote’s sense of smell was as
acute as his hearing, and as Sancho was so closely linked with him that
the fumes rose almost in a straight line, it could not be but that some
should reach his nose, and as soon as they did he came to its relief by
compressing it between his fingers, saying in a rather snuffing tone,
“Sancho, it strikes me thou art in great fear.”

“I am,” answered Sancho; “but how does your worship perceive it now
more than ever?”

“Because just now thou smellest stronger than ever, and not of
ambergris,” answered Don Quixote.

“Very likely,” said Sancho, “but that’s not my fault, but your
worship’s, for leading me about at unseasonable hours and at such
unwonted paces.”

“Then go back three or four, my friend,” said Don Quixote, all the time
with his fingers to his nose; “and for the future pay more attention to
thy person and to what thou owest to mine; for it is my great
familiarity with thee that has bred this contempt.