me, for had Cervantes thought of him he certainly would
not have omitted him in his hero’s outfit, which he obviously meant to
be complete. Him we owe to the landlord’s chance remark in Chapter III
that knights seldom travelled without squires. To try to think of a Don
Quixote without Sancho Panza is like trying to think of a one-bladed
pair of scissors.

The story was written at first, like the others, without any division
and without the intervention of Cid Hamete Benengeli; and it seems not
unlikely that Cervantes had some intention of bringing Dulcinea, or
Aldonza Lorenzo, on the scene in person. It was probably the ransacking
of the Don’s library and the discussion on the books of chivalry that
first suggested it to him that his idea was capable of development.
What, if instead of a mere string of farcical misadventures, he were to
make his tale a burlesque of one of these books, caricaturing their
style, incidents, and spirit?

In pursuance of this change of plan, he hastily and somewhat clumsily
divided what he had written into chapters on the model of “Amadis,”
invented the fable of a mysterious Arabic manuscript, and set up Cid
Hamete Benengeli in imitation of the almost invariable practice of the
chivalry-romance authors, who were fond of tracing their books to some
recondite source. In working out the new ideas, he soon found the value
of Sancho Panza. Indeed, the keynote, not only to Sancho’s part, but to
the whole book, is struck in the first words Sancho utters when he
announces his intention of taking his ass with him. “About the ass,” we
are told, “Don Quixote hesitated a little, trying whether he could call
to mind any knight-errant taking with him an esquire mounted on
ass-back; but no instance occurred to his memory.” We can see the whole
scene at a glance, the stolid unconsciousness of Sancho and the
perplexity of his master, upon whose perception the incongruity has
just forced itself. This is Sancho’s mission throughout the book; he is
an unconscious Mephistopheles, always unwittingly making mockery of his
master’s aspirations, always exposing the fallacy of his ideas by some
unintentional ad absurdum, always bringing him back to the world of
fact and commonplace by force of sheer stolidity.

By the time Cervantes had got his volume of novels off his hands, and
summoned up resolution enough to set about the Second Part in earnest,
the case was very much altered. Don Quixote and Sancho Panza had not
merely found favour, but had already become, what they have never since
ceased to be, veritable entities to the popular imagination. There was
no occasion for him now to interpolate extraneous matter; nay, his
readers told him plainly that what they wanted of him was more Don
Quixote and more Sancho Panza, and not novels, tales, or digressions.
To himself, too, his creations had become realities, and he had become
proud of them, especially of Sancho. He began the Second Part,
therefore, under very different conditions, and the difference makes
itself manifest at once. Even in translation the style will be seen to
be far easier, more flowing, more natural, and more like that of a man
sure of himself and of his audience. Don Quixote and Sancho undergo a
change also. In the First Part, Don Quixote has no character or
individuality whatever. He is nothing more than a crazy representative
of the sentiments of the chivalry romances. In all that he says and
does he is simply repeating the lesson he has learned from his books;
and therefore, it is absurd to speak of him in the gushing strain of
the sentimental critics when they dilate upon his nobleness,
disinterestedness, dauntless courage, and so forth. It was the business
of a knight-errant to right wrongs, redress injuries, and succour the
distressed, and this, as a matter of course, he makes his business when
he takes up the part; a knight-errant was bound to be intrepid, and so
he feels bound to cast fe