acked the man who had struck him
lance in hand, but so many thrust themselves between them that he could
not avenge him. Far from it, finding a shower of stones rained upon
him, and crossbows and muskets unnumbered levelled at him, he wheeled
Rocinante round and, as fast as his best gallop could take him, fled
from the midst of them, commending himself to God with all his heart to
deliver him out of this peril, in dread every step of some ball coming
in at his back and coming out at his breast, and every minute drawing
his breath to see whether it had gone from him. The members of the
band, however, were satisfied with seeing him take to flight, and did
not fire on him. They put up Sancho, scarcely restored to his senses,
on his ass, and let him go after his master; not that he was
sufficiently in his wits to guide the beast, but Dapple followed the
footsteps of Rocinante, from whom he could not remain a moment
separated. Don Quixote having got some way off looked back, and seeing
Sancho coming, waited for him, as he perceived that no one followed
him. The men of the troop stood their ground till night, and as the
enemy did not come out to battle, they returned to their town exulting;
and had they been aware of the ancient custom of the Greeks, they would
have erected a trophy on the spot.



p27e.jpg (47K)

Full Size



CHAPTER XXVIII.
OF MATTERS THAT BENENGELI SAYS HE WHO READS THEM WILL KNOW, IF HE READS
THEM WITH ATTENTION




p28a.jpg (111K)

Full Size



When the brave man flees, treachery is manifest and it is for wise men
to reserve themselves for better occasions. This proved to be the case
with Don Quixote, who, giving way before the fury of the townsfolk and
the hostile intentions of the angry troop, took to flight and, without
a thought of Sancho or the danger in which he was leaving him,
retreated to such a distance as he thought made him safe. Sancho, lying
across his ass, followed him, as has been said, and at length came up,
having by this time recovered his senses, and on joining him let
himself drop off Dapple at Rocinante’s feet, sore, bruised, and
belaboured. Don Quixote dismounted to examine his wounds, but finding
him whole from head to foot, he said to him, angrily enough, “In an
evil hour didst thou take to braying, Sancho! Where hast thou learned
that it is well done to mention the rope in the house of the man that
has been hanged? To the music of brays what harmonies couldst thou
expect to get but cudgels? Give thanks to God, Sancho, that they signed
the cross on thee just now with a stick, and did not mark thee _per
signum crucis_ with a cutlass.”

“I’m not equal to answering,” said Sancho, “for I feel as if I was
speaking through my shoulders; let us mount and get away from this;
I’ll keep from braying, but not from saying that knights-errant fly and
leave their good squires to be pounded like privet, or made meal of at
the hands of their enemies.”

“He does not fly who retires,” returned Don Quixote; “for I would have
thee know, Sancho, that the valour which is not based upon a foundation
of prudence is called rashness, and the exploits of the rash man are to
be attributed rather to good fortune than to courage; and so I own that
I retired, but not that I fled; and therein I have followed the example
of many valiant men who have reserved themselves for better times; the
histories are full of instances of this, but as it would not be any
good to thee or pleasure to me, I will not recount them to thee now.”

Sancho was by this time mounted with the help of Don Quixote, who then
himself mounted Rocinante, and at a leisurely pace they proceeded to
take shelter in a grove which was in sight about a quarter of a league
off. Every now and then Sancho gave vent to deep sighs and dismal
groans, and on Don Quixote asking him what caused such acute suffering,
he replied that, from the end of his back-bone up to the nape of his
ne