 amazed as well at Sancho’s boldness as at the patience
of his master, and concluded that the good temper the latter displayed
arose from the happiness he felt at having seen his lady Dulcinea, even
enchanted as she was; because otherwise the words and language Sancho
had addressed to him deserved a thrashing; for indeed he seemed to him
to have been rather impudent to his master, to whom he now observed,
“I, Señor Don Quixote of La Mancha, look upon the time I have spent in
travelling with your worship as very well employed, for I have gained
four things in the course of it; the first is that I have made your
acquaintance, which I consider great good fortune; the second, that I
have learned what the cave of Montesinos contains, together with the
transformations of Guadiana and of the lakes of Ruidera; which will be
of use to me for the Spanish Ovid that I have in hand; the third, to
have discovered the antiquity of cards, that they were in use at least
in the time of Charlemagne, as may be inferred from the words you say
Durandarte uttered when, at the end of that long spell while Montesinos
was talking to him, he woke up and said, ‘Patience and shuffle.’ This
phrase and expression he could not have learned while he was enchanted,
but only before he had become so, in France, and in the time of the
aforesaid emperor Charlemagne. And this demonstration is just the thing
for me for that other book I am writing, the ‘Supplement to Polydore
Vergil on the Invention of Antiquities;’ for I believe he never thought
of inserting that of cards in his book, as I mean to do in mine, and it
will be a matter of great importance, particularly when I can cite so
grave and veracious an authority as Señor Durandarte. And the fourth
thing is, that I have ascertained the source of the river Guadiana,
heretofore unknown to mankind.”

“You are right,” said Don Quixote; “but I should like to know, if by
God’s favour they grant you a licence to print those books of
yours—which I doubt—to whom do you mean to dedicate them?”

“There are lords and grandees in Spain to whom they can be dedicated,”
said the cousin.

“Not many,” said Don Quixote; “not that they are unworthy of it, but
because they do not care to accept books and incur the obligation of
making the return that seems due to the author’s labour and courtesy.
One prince I know who makes up for all the rest, and more—how much
more, if I ventured to say, perhaps I should stir up envy in many a
noble breast; but let this stand over for some more convenient time,
and let us go and look for some place to shelter ourselves in
to-night.”

“Not far from this,” said the cousin, “there is a hermitage, where
there lives a hermit, who they say was a soldier, and who has the
reputation of being a good Christian and a very intelligent and
charitable man. Close to the hermitage he has a small house which he
built at his own cost, but though small it is large enough for the
reception of guests.”

“Has this hermit any hens, do you think?” asked Sancho.

“Few hermits are without them,” said Don Quixote; “for those we see
now-a-days are not like the hermits of the Egyptian deserts who were
clad in palm-leaves, and lived on the roots of the earth. But do not
think that by praising these I am disparaging the others; all I mean to
say is that the penances of those of the present day do not come up to
the asceticism and austerity of former times; but it does not follow
from this that they are not all worthy; at least I think them so; and
at the worst the hypocrite who pretends to be good does less harm than
the open sinner.”

At this point they saw approaching the spot where they stood a man on
foot, proceeding at a rapid pace, and beating a mule loaded with lances
and halberds. When he came up to them, he saluted them and passed on
without stopping. Don Quixote called to him, “Stay, good fellow; you
seem to be making more haste than suits that mule.”