h them; for my father, like a wise and
far-sighted man, as soon as he heard the first edict for our expulsion,
quitted the village and departed in quest of some refuge for us abroad.
He left hidden and buried, at a spot of which I alone have knowledge, a
large quantity of pearls and precious stones of great value, together
with a sum of money in gold cruzadoes and doubloons. He charged me on
no account to touch the treasure, if by any chance they expelled us
before his return. I obeyed him, and with my uncles, as I have said,
and others of our kindred and neighbours, passed over to Barbary, and
the place where we took up our abode was Algiers, much the same as if
we had taken it up in hell itself. The king heard of my beauty, and
report told him of my wealth, which was in some degree fortunate for
me. He summoned me before him, and asked me what part of Spain I came
from, and what money and jewels I had. I mentioned the place, and told
him the jewels and money were buried there; but that they might easily
be recovered if I myself went back for them. All this I told him, in
dread lest my beauty and not his own covetousness should influence him.
While he was engaged in conversation with me, they brought him word
that in company with me was one of the handsomest and most graceful
youths that could be imagined. I knew at once that they were speaking
of Don Gaspar Gregorio, whose comeliness surpasses the most highly
vaunted beauty. I was troubled when I thought of the danger he was in,
for among those barbarous Turks a fair youth is more esteemed than a
woman, be she ever so beautiful. The king immediately ordered him to be
brought before him that he might see him, and asked me if what they
said about the youth was true. I then, almost as if inspired by heaven,
told him it was, but that I would have him to know it was not a man,
but a woman like myself, and I entreated him to allow me to go and
dress her in the attire proper to her, so that her beauty might be seen
to perfection, and that she might present herself before him with less
embarrassment. He bade me go by all means, and said that the next day
we should discuss the plan to be adopted for my return to Spain to
carry away the hidden treasure. I saw Don Gaspar, I told him the danger
he was in if he let it be seen he was a man, I dressed him as a Moorish
woman, and that same afternoon I brought him before the king, who was
charmed when he saw him, and resolved to keep the damsel and make a
present of her to the Grand Signor; and to avoid the risk she might run
among the women of his seraglio, and distrustful of himself, he
commanded her to be placed in the house of some Moorish ladies of rank
who would protect and attend to her; and thither he was taken at once.
What we both suffered (for I cannot deny that I love him) may be left
to the imagination of those who are separated if they love one another
dearly. The king then arranged that I should return to Spain in this
brigantine, and that two Turks, those who killed your soldiers, should
accompany me. There also came with me this Spanish renegade”—and here
she pointed to him who had first spoken—“whom I know to be secretly a
Christian, and to be more desirous of being left in Spain than of
returning to Barbary. The rest of the crew of the brigantine are Moors
and Turks, who merely serve as rowers. The two Turks, greedy and
insolent, instead of obeying the orders we had to land me and this
renegade in Christian dress (with which we came provided) on the first
Spanish ground we came to, chose to run along the coast and make some
prize if they could, fearing that if they put us ashore first, we
might, in case of some accident befalling us, make it known that the
brigantine was at sea, and thus, if there happened to be any galleys on
the coast, they might be taken. We sighted this shore last night, and
knowing nothing of these galleys, we were discovered, and the result
was