m and
kept him in his bed for six days, during which he was often visited by
his friends the curate, the bachelor, and the barber, while his good
squire Sancho Panza never quitted his bedside. They, persuaded that it
was grief at finding himself vanquished, and the object of his heart,
the liberation and disenchantment of Dulcinea, unattained, that kept
him in this state, strove by all the means in their power to cheer him
up; the bachelor bidding him take heart and get up to begin his
pastoral life, for which he himself, he said, had already composed an
eclogue that would take the shine out of all Sannazaro had ever
written, and had bought with his own money two famous dogs to guard the
flock, one called Barcino and the other Butron, which a herdsman of
Quintanar had sold him.

But for all this Don Quixote could not shake off his sadness. His
friends called in the doctor, who felt his pulse and was not very well
satisfied with it, and said that in any case it would be well for him
to attend to the health of his soul, as that of his body was in a bad
way. Don Quixote heard this calmly; but not so his housekeeper, his
niece, and his squire, who fell weeping bitterly, as if they had him
lying dead before them. The doctor’s opinion was that melancholy and
depression were bringing him to his end. Don Quixote begged them to
leave him to himself, as he had a wish to sleep a little. They obeyed,
and he slept at one stretch, as the saying is, more than six hours, so
that the housekeeper and niece thought he was going to sleep for ever.
But at the end of that time he woke up, and in a loud voice exclaimed,
“Blessed be Almighty God, who has shown me such goodness. In truth his
mercies are boundless, and the sins of men can neither limit them nor
keep them back!”

The niece listened with attention to her uncle’s words, and they struck
her as more coherent than what usually fell from him, at least during
his illness, so she asked, “What are you saying, señor? Has anything
strange occurred? What mercies or what sins of men are you talking of?”

“The mercies, niece,” said Don Quixote, “are those that God has this
moment shown me, and with him, as I said, my sins are no impediment to
them. My reason is now free and clear, rid of the dark shadows of
ignorance that my unhappy constant study of those detestable books of
chivalry cast over it. Now I see through their absurdities and
deceptions, and it only grieves me that this destruction of my
illusions has come so late that it leaves me no time to make some
amends by reading other books that might be a light to my soul. Niece,
I feel myself at the point of death, and I would fain meet it in such a
way as to show that my life has not been so ill that I should leave
behind me the name of a madman; for though I have been one, I would not
that the fact should be made plainer at my death. Call in to me, my
dear, my good friends the curate, the bachelor Samson Carrasco, and
Master Nicholas the barber, for I wish to confess and make my will.”
But his niece was saved the trouble by the entrance of the three. The
instant Don Quixote saw them he exclaimed, “Good news for you, good
sirs, that I am no longer Don Quixote of La Mancha, but Alonso Quixano,
whose way of life won for him the name of Good. Now am I the enemy of
Amadis of Gaul and of the whole countless troop of his descendants;
odious to me now are all the profane stories of knight-errantry; now I
perceive my folly, and the peril into which reading them brought me;
now, by God’s mercy schooled into my right senses, I loathe them.”

When the three heard him speak in this way, they had no doubt whatever
that some new craze had taken possession of him; and said Samson,
“What? Señor Don Quixote! Now that we have intelligence of the lady
Dulcinea being disenchanted, are you taking this line; now, just as we
are on the point of becoming shepherds, to pass our lives singing, like
princes, 