 to go knocking till
they hear us and open the door; making a disturbance and confusion all
through the household? Are we going, do you fancy, to the house of our
wenches, like gallants who come and knock and go in at any hour,
however late it may be?”

“Let us first of all find out the palace for certain,” replied Don
Quixote, “and then I will tell thee, Sancho, what we had best do; but
look, Sancho, for either I see badly, or that dark mass that one sees
from here should be Dulcinea’s palace.”

“Then let your worship lead the way,” said Sancho, “perhaps it may be
so; though I see it with my eyes and touch it with my hands, I’ll
believe it as much as I believe it is daylight now.”

Don Quixote took the lead, and having gone a matter of two hundred
paces he came upon the mass that produced the shade, and found it was a
great tower, and then he perceived that the building in question was no
palace, but the chief church of the town, and said he, “It’s the church
we have lit upon, Sancho.”

“So I see,” said Sancho, “and God grant we may not light upon our
graves; it is no good sign to find oneself wandering in a graveyard at
this time of night; and that, after my telling your worship, if I don’t
mistake, that the house of this lady will be in an alley without an
outlet.”

“The curse of God on thee for a blockhead!” said Don Quixote; “where
hast thou ever heard of castles and royal palaces being built in alleys
without an outlet?”

“Señor,” replied Sancho, “every country has a way of its own; perhaps
here in El Toboso it is the way to build palaces and grand buildings in
alleys; so I entreat your worship to let me search about among these
streets or alleys before me, and perhaps, in some corner or other, I
may stumble on this palace—and I wish I saw the dogs eating it for
leading us such a dance.”

“Speak respectfully of what belongs to my lady, Sancho,” said Don
Quixote; “let us keep the feast in peace, and not throw the rope after
the bucket.”

“I’ll hold my tongue,” said Sancho, “but how am I to take it patiently
when your worship wants me, with only once seeing the house of our
mistress, to know always, and find it in the middle of the night, when
your worship can’t find it, who must have seen it thousands of times?”

“Thou wilt drive me to desperation, Sancho,” said Don Quixote. “Look
here, heretic, have I not told thee a thousand times that I have never
once in my life seen the peerless Dulcinea or crossed the threshold of
her palace, and that I am enamoured solely by hearsay and by the great
reputation she bears for beauty and discretion?”

“I hear it now,” returned Sancho; “and I may tell you that if you have
not seen her, no more have I.”

“That cannot be,” said Don Quixote, “for, at any rate, thou saidst, on
bringing back the answer to the letter I sent by thee, that thou sawest
her sifting wheat.”

“Don’t mind that, señor,” said Sancho; “I must tell you that my seeing
her and the answer I brought you back were by hearsay too, for I can no
more tell who the lady Dulcinea is than I can hit the sky.”

“Sancho, Sancho,” said Don Quixote, “there are times for jests and
times when jests are out of place; if I tell thee that I have neither
seen nor spoken to the lady of my heart, it is no reason why thou
shouldst say thou hast not spoken to her or seen her, when the contrary
is the case, as thou well knowest.”

While the two were engaged in this conversation, they perceived someone
with a pair of mules approaching the spot where they stood, and from
the noise the plough made, as it dragged along the ground, they guessed
him to be some labourer who had got up before daybreak to go to his
work, and so it proved to be. He came along singing the ballad that
says-

Ill did ye fare, ye men of France,
In Roncesvalles chase—


“May I die, Sancho,” said Don Quixote, when he heard him, “if any good
will come to us to-night! Dost thou not hear what that clo