 we now enjoy in this age of ours, so poor in light
entertainment, not only the charm of his veracious history, but also of
the tales and episodes contained in it which are, in a measure, no less
pleasing, ingenious, and truthful, than the history itself; which,
resuming its thread, carded, spun, and wound, relates that just as the
curate was going to offer consolation to Cardenio, he was interrupted
by a voice that fell upon his ear saying in plaintive tones:

“O God! is it possible I have found a place that may serve as a secret
grave for the weary load of this body that I support so unwillingly? If
the solitude these mountains promise deceives me not, it is so; ah! woe
is me! how much more grateful to my mind will be the society of these
rocks and brakes that permit me to complain of my misfortune to Heaven,
than that of any human being, for there is none on earth to look to for
counsel in doubt, comfort in sorrow, or relief in distress!”

All this was heard distinctly by the curate and those with him, and as
it seemed to them to be uttered close by, as indeed it was, they got up
to look for the speaker, and before they had gone twenty paces they
discovered behind a rock, seated at the foot of an ash tree, a youth in
the dress of a peasant, whose face they were unable at the moment to
see as he was leaning forward, bathing his feet in the brook that
flowed past. They approached so silently that he did not perceive them,
being fully occupied in bathing his feet, which were so fair that they
looked like two pieces of shining crystal brought forth among the other
stones of the brook. The whiteness and beauty of these feet struck them
with surprise, for they did not seem to have been made to crush clods
or to follow the plough and the oxen as their owner’s dress suggested;
and so, finding they had not been noticed, the curate, who was in
front, made a sign to the other two to conceal themselves behind some
fragments of rock that lay there; which they did, observing closely
what the youth was about. He had on a loose double-skirted dark brown
jacket bound tight to his body with a white cloth; he wore besides
breeches and gaiters of brown cloth, and on his head a brown montera;
and he had the gaiters turned up as far as the middle of the leg, which
verily seemed to be of pure alabaster.



c28b.jpg (339K)

Full Size




As soon as he had done bathing his beautiful feet, he wiped them with a
towel he took from under the montera, on taking off which he raised his
face, and those who were watching him had an opportunity of seeing a
beauty so exquisite that Cardenio said to the curate in a whisper:

“As this is not Luscinda, it is no human creature but a divine being.”

The youth then took off the montera, and shaking his head from side to
side there broke loose and spread out a mass of hair that the beams of
the sun might have envied; by this they knew that what had seemed a
peasant was a lovely woman, nay the most beautiful the eyes of two of
them had ever beheld, or even Cardenio’s if they had not seen and known
Luscinda, for he afterwards declared that only the beauty of Luscinda
could compare with this. The long auburn tresses not only covered her
shoulders, but such was their length and abundance, concealed her all
round beneath their masses, so that except the feet nothing of her form
was visible. She now used her hands as a comb, and if her feet had
seemed like bits of crystal in the water, her hands looked like pieces
of driven snow among her locks; all which increased not only the
admiration of the three beholders, but their anxiety to learn who she
was. With this object they resolved to show themselves, and at the stir
they made in getting upon their feet the fair damsel raised her head,
and parting her hair from before her eyes with both hands, she looked
to see who had made the noise, and the instant she perceived them she
started to her feet, and with