 disguise, to follow her
whithersoever she may go, as the arrow seeks its mark or the sailor the
pole-star. She knows nothing more of my passion than what she may have
learned from having sometimes seen from a distance that my eyes were
filled with tears. You know already, señor, the wealth and noble birth
of my parents, and that I am their sole heir; if this be a sufficient
inducement for you to venture to make me completely happy, accept me at
once as your son; for if my father, influenced by other objects of his
own, should disapprove of this happiness I have sought for myself, time
has more power to alter and change things, than human will.”

With this the love-smitten youth was silent, while the Judge, after
hearing him, was astonished, perplexed, and surprised, as well at the
manner and intelligence with which Don Luis had confessed the secret of
his heart, as at the position in which he found himself, not knowing
what course to take in a matter so sudden and unexpected. All the
answer, therefore, he gave him was to bid him to make his mind easy for
the present, and arrange with his servants not to take him back that
day, so that there might be time to consider what was best for all
parties. Don Luis kissed his hands by force, nay, bathed them with his
tears, in a way that would have touched a heart of marble, not to say
that of the Judge, who, as a shrewd man, had already perceived how
advantageous the marriage would be to his daughter; though, were it
possible, he would have preferred that it should be brought about with
the consent of the father of Don Luis, who he knew looked for a title
for his son.

The guests had by this time made peace with the landlord, for, by
persuasion and Don Quixote’s fair words more than by threats, they had
paid him what he demanded, and the servants of Don Luis were waiting
for the end of the conversation with the Judge and their master’s
decision, when the devil, who never sleeps, contrived that the barber,
from whom Don Quixote had taken Mambrino’s helmet, and Sancho Panza the
trappings of his ass in exchange for those of his own, should at this
instant enter the inn; which said barber, as he led his ass to the
stable, observed Sancho Panza engaged in repairing something or other
belonging to the pack-saddle; and the moment he saw it he knew it, and
made bold to attack Sancho, exclaiming, “Ho, sir thief, I have caught
you! hand over my basin and my pack-saddle, and all my trappings that
you robbed me of.”

Sancho, finding himself so unexpectedly assailed, and hearing the abuse
poured upon him, seized the pack-saddle with one hand, and with the
other gave the barber a cuff that bathed his teeth in blood. The
barber, however, was not so ready to relinquish the prize he had made
in the pack-saddle; on the contrary, he raised such an outcry that
everyone in the inn came running to know what the noise and quarrel
meant. “Here, in the name of the king and justice!” he cried, “this
thief and highwayman wants to kill me for trying to recover my
property.”

“You lie,” said Sancho, “I am no highwayman; it was in fair war my
master Don Quixote won these spoils.”

Don Quixote was standing by at the time, highly pleased to see his
squire’s stoutness, both offensive and defensive, and from that time
forth he reckoned him a man of mettle, and in his heart resolved to dub
him a knight on the first opportunity that presented itself, feeling
sure that the order of chivalry would be fittingly bestowed upon him.

In the course of the altercation, among other things the barber said,
“Gentlemen, this pack-saddle is mine as surely as I owe God a death,
and I know it as well as if I had given birth to it, and here is my ass
in the stable who will not let me lie; only try it, and if it does not
fit him like a glove, call me a rascal; and what is more, the same day
I was robbed of this, they robbed me likewise of a new brass basin,
never yet hand