 Mendoza the salt is spilt on his table, and gloom
is spilt over his heart, as if nature was obliged to give warning of
coming misfortunes by means of such trivial things as these. The wise
man and the Christian should not trifle with what it may please heaven
to do. Scipio on coming to Africa stumbled as he leaped on shore; his
soldiers took it as a bad omen; but he, clasping the soil with his
arms, exclaimed, ‘Thou canst not escape me, Africa, for I hold thee
tight between my arms.’ Thus, Sancho, meeting those images has been to
me a most happy occurrence.”

“I can well believe it,” said Sancho; “but I wish your worship would
tell me what is the reason that the Spaniards, when they are about to
give battle, in calling on that Saint James the Moorslayer, say
‘Santiago and close Spain!’ Is Spain, then, open, so that it is needful
to close it; or what is the meaning of this form?”

“Thou art very simple, Sancho,” said Don Quixote; “God, look you, gave
that great knight of the Red Cross to Spain as her patron saint and
protector, especially in those hard struggles the Spaniards had with
the Moors; and therefore they invoke and call upon him as their
defender in all their battles; and in these he has been many a time
seen beating down, trampling under foot, destroying and slaughtering
the Hagarene squadrons in the sight of all; of which fact I could give
thee many examples recorded in truthful Spanish histories.”

Sancho changed the subject, and said to his master, “I marvel, señor,
at the boldness of Altisidora, the duchess’s handmaid; he whom they
call Love must have cruelly pierced and wounded her; they say he is a
little blind urchin who, though blear-eyed, or more properly speaking
sightless, if he aims at a heart, be it ever so small, hits it and
pierces it through and through with his arrows. I have heard it said
too that the arrows of Love are blunted and robbed of their points by
maidenly modesty and reserve; but with this Altisidora it seems they
are sharpened rather than blunted.”

“Bear in mind, Sancho,” said Don Quixote, “that love is influenced by
no consideration, recognises no restraints of reason, and is of the
same nature as death, that assails alike the lofty palaces of kings and
the humble cabins of shepherds; and when it takes entire possession of
a heart, the first thing it does is to banish fear and shame from it;
and so without shame Altisidora declared her passion, which excited in
my mind embarrassment rather than commiseration.”

“Notable cruelty!” exclaimed Sancho; “unheard-of ingratitude! I can
only say for myself that the very smallest loving word of hers would
have subdued me and made a slave of me. The devil! What a heart of
marble, what bowels of brass, what a soul of mortar! But I can’t
imagine what it is that this damsel saw in your worship that could have
conquered and captivated her so. What gallant figure was it, what bold
bearing, what sprightly grace, what comeliness of feature, which of
these things by itself, or what all together, could have made her fall
in love with you? For indeed and in truth many a time I stop to look at
your worship from the sole of your foot to the topmost hair of your
head, and I see more to frighten one than to make one fall in love;
moreover I have heard say that beauty is the first and main thing that
excites love, and as your worship has none at all, I don’t know what
the poor creature fell in love with.”

“Recollect, Sancho,” replied Don Quixote, “there are two sorts of
beauty, one of the mind, the other of the body; that of the mind
displays and exhibits itself in intelligence, in modesty, in honourable
conduct, in generosity, in good breeding; and all these qualities are
possible and may exist in an ugly man; and when it is this sort of
beauty and not that of the body that is the attraction, love is apt to
spring up suddenly and violently. I, Sancho, perceive clearly enough
that I am not beaut