 am beginning to think it is, where shall I find the ribs
to bear it?”

“Be they phantoms ever so much,” said Don Quixote, “I will not permit
them to touch a thread of thy garments; for if they played tricks with
thee the time before, it was because I was unable to leap the walls of
the yard; but now we are on a wide plain, where I shall be able to
wield my sword as I please.”

“And if they enchant and cripple you as they did the last time,” said
Sancho, “what difference will it make being on the open plain or not?”

“For all that,” replied Don Quixote, “I entreat thee, Sancho, to keep a
good heart, for experience will tell thee what mine is.”

“I will, please God,” answered Sancho, and the two retiring to one side
of the road set themselves to observe closely what all these moving
lights might be; and very soon afterwards they made out some twenty
encamisados, all on horseback, with lighted torches in their hands, the
awe-inspiring aspect of whom completely extinguished the courage of
Sancho, who began to chatter with his teeth like one in the cold fit of
an ague; and his heart sank and his teeth chattered still more when
they perceived distinctly that behind them there came a litter covered
over with black and followed by six more mounted figures in mourning
down to the very feet of their mules—for they could perceive plainly
they were not horses by the easy pace at which they went. And as the
encamisados came along they muttered to themselves in a low plaintive
tone. This strange spectacle at such an hour and in such a solitary
place was quite enough to strike terror into Sancho’s heart, and even
into his master’s; and (save in Don Quixote’s case) did so, for all
Sancho’s resolution had now broken down. It was just the opposite with
his master, whose imagination immediately conjured up all this to him
vividly as one of the adventures of his books.

He took it into his head that the litter was a bier on which was borne
some sorely wounded or slain knight, to avenge whom was a task reserved
for him alone; and without any further reasoning he laid his lance in
rest, fixed himself firmly in his saddle, and with gallant spirit and
bearing took up his position in the middle of the road where the
encamisados must of necessity pass; and as soon as he saw them near at
hand he raised his voice and said:

“Halt, knights, or whosoever ye may be, and render me account of who ye
are, whence ye come, where ye go, what it is ye carry upon that bier,
for, to judge by appearances, either ye have done some wrong or some
wrong has been done to you, and it is fitting and necessary that I
should know, either that I may chastise you for the evil ye have done,
or else that I may avenge you for the injury that has been inflicted
upon you.”

“We are in haste,” answered one of the encamisados, “and the inn is far
off, and we cannot stop to render you such an account as you demand;”
and spurring his mule he moved on.

Don Quixote was mightily provoked by this answer, and seizing the mule
by the bridle he said, “Halt, and be more mannerly, and render an
account of what I have asked of you; else, take my defiance to combat,
all of you.”

The mule was shy, and was so frightened at her bridle being seized that
rearing up she flung her rider to the ground over her haunches. An
attendant who was on foot, seeing the encamisado fall, began to abuse
Don Quixote, who now moved to anger, without any more ado, laying his
lance in rest charged one of the men in mourning and brought him badly
wounded to the ground, and as he wheeled round upon the others the
agility with which he attacked and routed them was a sight to see, for
it seemed just as if wings had that instant grown upon Rocinante, so
lightly and proudly did he bear himself. The encamisados were all timid
folk and unarmed, so they speedily made their escape from the fray and
set off at a run across the plain with their lighted torches, 