f a dozen men about as big
as hazel nuts; for, so far as I could see, there were no more on the
whole earth? If your lordship would be so good as to give me ever so
small a bit of heaven, were it no more than half a league, I’d rather
have it than the best island in the world.”

“Recollect, Sancho,” said the duke, “I cannot give a bit of heaven, no
not so much as the breadth of my nail, to anyone; rewards and favours
of that sort are reserved for God alone. What I can give I give you,
and that is a real, genuine island, compact, well proportioned, and
uncommonly fertile and fruitful, where, if you know how to use your
opportunities, you may, with the help of the world’s riches, gain those
of heaven.”

“Well then,” said Sancho, “let the island come; and I’ll try and be
such a governor, that in spite of scoundrels I’ll go to heaven; and
it’s not from any craving to quit my own humble condition or better
myself, but from the desire I have to try what it tastes like to be a
governor.”

“If you once make trial of it, Sancho,” said the duke, “you’ll eat your
fingers off after the government, so sweet a thing is it to command and
be obeyed. Depend upon it when your master comes to be emperor (as he
will beyond a doubt from the course his affairs are taking), it will be
no easy matter to wrest the dignity from him, and he will be sore and
sorry at heart to have been so long without becoming one.”

“Señor,” said Sancho, “it is my belief it’s a good thing to be in
command, if it’s only over a drove of cattle.”

“May I be buried with you, Sancho,” said the duke, “but you know
everything; I hope you will make as good a governor as your sagacity
promises; and that is all I have to say; and now remember to-morrow is
the day you must set out for the government of the island, and this
evening they will provide you with the proper attire for you to wear,
and all things requisite for your departure.”

“Let them dress me as they like,” said Sancho; “however I’m dressed
I’ll be Sancho Panza.”

“That’s true,” said the duke; “but one’s dress must be suited to the
office or rank one holds; for it would not do for a jurist to dress
like a soldier, or a soldier like a priest. You, Sancho, shall go
partly as a lawyer, partly as a captain, for, in the island I am giving
you, arms are needed as much as letters, and letters as much as arms.”

“Of letters I know but little,” said Sancho, “for I don’t even know the
A B C; but it is enough for me to have the Christus in my memory to be
a good governor. As for arms, I’ll handle those they give me till I
drop, and then, God be my help!”

“With so good a memory,” said the duke, “Sancho cannot go wrong in
anything.”

Here Don Quixote joined them; and learning what passed, and how soon
Sancho was to go to his government, he with the duke’s permission took
him by the hand, and retired to his room with him for the purpose of
giving him advice as to how he was to demean himself in his office. As
soon as they had entered the chamber he closed the door after him, and
almost by force made Sancho sit down beside him, and in a quiet tone
thus addressed him: “I give infinite thanks to heaven, friend Sancho,
that, before I have met with any good luck, fortune has come forward to
meet thee. I who counted upon my good fortune to discharge the
recompense of thy services, find myself still waiting for advancement,
while thou, before the time, and contrary to all reasonable
expectation, seest thyself blessed in the fulfillment of thy desires.
Some will bribe, beg, solicit, rise early, entreat, persist, without
attaining the object of their suit; while another comes, and without
knowing why or wherefore, finds himself invested with the place or
office so many have sued for; and here it is that the common saying,
‘There is good luck as well as bad luck in suits,’ applies. Thou, who,
to my thinking, art beyond all doubt a dullard, without early rising or
night