n fields, where she will
remain waiting until the number of stripes is completed.”

“Now then, Sancho!” said the duchess, “show courage, and gratitude for
your master Don Quixote’s bread that you have eaten; we are all bound
to oblige and please him for his benevolent disposition and lofty
chivalry. Consent to this whipping, my son; to the devil with the
devil, and leave fear to milksops, for ‘a stout heart breaks bad luck,’
as you very well know.”

To this Sancho replied with an irrelevant remark, which, addressing
Merlin, he made to him, “Will your worship tell me, Señor Merlin—when
that courier devil came up he gave my master a message from Señor
Montesinos, charging him to wait for him here, as he was coming to
arrange how the lady Doña Dulcinea del Toboso was to be disenchanted;
but up to the present we have not seen Montesinos, nor anything like
him.”

To which Merlin made answer, “The devil, Sancho, is a blockhead and a
great scoundrel; I sent him to look for your master, but not with a
message from Montesinos but from myself; for Montesinos is in his cave
expecting, or more properly speaking, waiting for his disenchantment;
for there’s the tail to be skinned yet for him; if he owes you
anything, or you have any business to transact with him, I’ll bring him
to you and put him where you choose; but for the present make up your
mind to consent to this penance, and believe me it will be very good
for you, for soul as well for body—for your soul because of the charity
with which you perform it, for your body because I know that you are of
a sanguine habit and it will do you no harm to draw a little blood.”

“There are a great many doctors in the world; even the enchanters are
doctors,” said Sancho; “however, as everybody tells me the same
thing—though I can’t see it myself—I say I am willing to give myself
the three thousand three hundred lashes, provided I am to lay them on
whenever I like, without any fixing of days or times; and I’ll try and
get out of debt as quickly as I can, that the world may enjoy the
beauty of the lady Dulcinea del Toboso; as it seems, contrary to what I
thought, that she is beautiful after all. It must be a condition, too,
that I am not to be bound to draw blood with the scourge, and that if
any of the lashes happen to be fly-flappers they are to count. Item,
that, in case I should make any mistake in the reckoning, Señor Merlin,
as he knows everything, is to keep count, and let me know how many are
still wanting or over the number.”

“There will be no need to let you know of any over,” said Merlin,
“because, when you reach the full number, the lady Dulcinea will at
once, and that very instant, be disenchanted, and will come in her
gratitude to seek out the worthy Sancho, and thank him, and even reward
him for the good work. So you have no cause to be uneasy about stripes
too many or too few; heaven forbid I should cheat anyone of even a hair
of his head.”

“Well then, in God’s hands be it,” said Sancho; “in the hard case I’m
in I give in; I say I accept the penance on the conditions laid down.”

The instant Sancho uttered these last words the music of the clarions
struck up once more, and again a host of muskets were discharged, and
Don Quixote hung on Sancho’s neck kissing him again and again on the
forehead and cheeks. The duchess and the duke expressed the greatest
satisfaction, the car began to move on, and as it passed the fair
Dulcinea bowed to the duke and duchess and made a low curtsey to
Sancho.



p35c.jpg (284K)

Full Size



And now bright smiling dawn came on apace; the flowers of the field,
revived, raised up their heads, and the crystal waters of the brooks,
murmuring over the grey and white pebbles, hastened to pay their
tribute to the expectant rivers; the glad earth, the unclouded sky, the
fresh breeze, the clear light, each and all showed that the day that
came treading on the skirts of morning would be