 dry as barley spears, and so I say it
without tears), where, I ask, can a duenna with a beard go to? What
father or mother will feel pity for her? Who will help her? For, if
even when she has a smooth skin, and a face tortured by a thousand
kinds of washes and cosmetics, she can hardly get anybody to love her,
what will she do when she shows a countenance turned into a thicket? Oh
duennas, companions mine! it was an unlucky moment when we were born
and an ill-starred hour when our fathers begot us!” And as she said
this she showed signs of being about to faint.



p39e.jpg (27K)



CHAPTER XL.
OF MATTERS RELATING AND BELONGING TO THIS ADVENTURE AND TO THIS
MEMORABLE HISTORY




p40a.jpg (129K)

Full Size



Verily and truly all those who find pleasure in histories like this
ought show their gratitude to Cide Hamete, its original author, for the
scrupulous care he has taken to set before us all its minute
particulars, not leaving anything, however trifling it may be, that he
does not make clear and plain. He portrays the thoughts, he reveals the
fancies, he answers implied questions, clears up doubts, sets
objections at rest, and, in a word, makes plain the smallest points the
most inquisitive can desire to know. O renowned author! O happy Don
Quixote! O famous famous droll Sancho! All and each, may ye live
countless ages for the delight and amusement of the dwellers on earth!

The history goes on to say that when Sancho saw the Distressed One
faint he exclaimed: “I swear by the faith of an honest man and the
shades of all my ancestors the Panzas, that never I did see or hear of,
nor has my master related or conceived in his mind, such an adventure
as this. A thousand devils—not to curse thee—take thee, Malambruno, for
an enchanter and a giant! Couldst thou find no other sort of punishment
for these sinners but bearding them? Would it not have been better—it
would have been better for them—to have taken off half their noses from
the middle upwards, even though they’d have snuffled when they spoke,
than to have put beards on them? I’ll bet they have not the means of
paying anybody to shave them.”

“That is the truth, señor,” said one of the twelve; “we have not the
money to get ourselves shaved, and so we have, some of us, taken to
using sticking-plasters by way of an economical remedy, for by applying
them to our faces and plucking them off with a jerk we are left as bare
and smooth as the bottom of a stone mortar. There are, to be sure,
women in Kandy that go about from house to house to remove down, and
trim eyebrows, and make cosmetics for the use of the women, but we, the
duennas of my lady, would never let them in, for most of them have a
flavour of agents that have ceased to be principals; and if we are not
relieved by Señor Don Quixote we shall be carried to our graves with
beards.”

“I will pluck out my own in the land of the Moors,” said Don Quixote,
“if I don’t cure yours.”

At this instant the Trifaldi recovered from her swoon and said, “The
chink of that promise, valiant knight, reached my ears in the midst of
my swoon, and has been the means of reviving me and bringing back my
senses; and so once more I implore you, illustrious errant, indomitable
sir, to let your gracious promises be turned into deeds.”

“There shall be no delay on my part,” said Don Quixote. “Bethink you,
señora, of what I must do, for my heart is most eager to serve you.”

“The fact is,” replied the Distressed One, “it is five thousand
leagues, a couple more or less, from this to the kingdom of Kandy, if
you go by land; but if you go through the air and in a straight line,
it is three thousand two hundred and twenty-seven. You must know, too,
that Malambruno told me that, whenever fate provided the knight our
deliverer, he himself would send him a steed far better and with less
tricks than a post-horse; for he will be that same wooden horse on
which the valiant P