d to her,
“What is this, mistress housekeeper? What has happened to you? One
would think you heart-broken.”

“Nothing, Señor Samson,” said she, “only that my master is breaking
out, plainly breaking out.”

“Whereabouts is he breaking out, señora?” asked Samson; “has any part
of his body burst?”

“He is only breaking out at the door of his madness,” she replied; “I
mean, dear señor bachelor, that he is going to break out again (and
this will be the third time) to hunt all over the world for what he
calls ventures, though I can’t make out why he gives them that name.
The first time he was brought back to us slung across the back of an
ass, and belaboured all over; and the second time he came in an
ox-cart, shut up in a cage, in which he persuaded himself he was
enchanted, and the poor creature was in such a state that the mother
that bore him would not have known him; lean, yellow, with his eyes
sunk deep in the cells of his skull; so that to bring him round again,
ever so little, cost me more than six hundred eggs, as God knows, and
all the world, and my hens too, that won’t let me tell a lie.”

“That I can well believe,” replied the bachelor, “for they are so good
and so fat, and so well-bred, that they would not say one thing for
another, though they were to burst for it. In short then, mistress
housekeeper, that is all, and there is nothing the matter, except what
it is feared Don Quixote may do?”

“No, señor,” said she.

“Well then,” returned the bachelor, “don’t be uneasy, but go home in
peace; get me ready something hot for breakfast, and while you are on
the way say the prayer of Santa Apollonia, that is if you know it; for
I will come presently and you will see miracles.”

“Woe is me,” cried the housekeeper, “is it the prayer of Santa
Apollonia you would have me say? That would do if it was the toothache
my master had; but it is in the brains, what he has got.”

“I know what I am saying, mistress housekeeper; go, and don’t set
yourself to argue with me, for you know I am a bachelor of Salamanca,
and one can’t be more of a bachelor than that,” replied Carrasco; and
with this the housekeeper retired, and the bachelor went to look for
the curate, and arrange with him what will be told in its proper place.

While Don Quixote and Sancho were shut up together, they had a
discussion which the history records with great precision and
scrupulous exactness. Sancho said to his master, “Señor, I have educed
my wife to let me go with your worship wherever you choose to take me.”

“Induced, you should say, Sancho,” said Don Quixote; “not educed.”

“Once or twice, as well as I remember,” replied Sancho, “I have begged
of your worship not to mend my words, if so be as you understand what I
mean by them; and if you don’t understand them to say ‘Sancho,’ or
‘devil,’ ‘I don’t understand thee; and if I don’t make my meaning
plain, then you may correct me, for I am so focile—”

“I don’t understand thee, Sancho,” said Don Quixote at once; “for I
know not what ‘I am so focile’ means.”

“‘So focile’ means I am so much that way,” replied Sancho.

“I understand thee still less now,” said Don Quixote.

“Well, if you can’t understand me,” said Sancho, “I don’t know how to
put it; I know no more, God help me.”

“Oh, now I have hit it,” said Don Quixote; “thou wouldst say thou art
so docile, tractable, and gentle that thou wilt take what I say to
thee, and submit to what I teach thee.”

“I would bet,” said Sancho, “that from the very first you understood
me, and knew what I meant, but you wanted to put me out that you might
hear me make another couple of dozen blunders.”

“May be so,” replied Don Quixote; “but to come to the point, what does
Teresa say?”

“Teresa says,” replied Sancho, “that I should make sure with your
worship, and ‘let papers speak and beards be still,’ for ‘he who binds
does not wrangle,’ since one ‘take’ is better than two ‘I’ll give
thee’s;’ and 