er the
data justify the inference or not.

The men whose names by common consent stand in the front rank of
Spanish literature, Cervantes, Lope de Vega, Quevedo, Calderon,
Garcilaso de la Vega, the Mendozas, Gongora, were all men of ancient
families, and, curiously, all, except the last, of families that traced
their origin to the same mountain district in the North of Spain. The
family of Cervantes is commonly said to have been of Galician origin,
and unquestionably it was in possession of lands in Galicia at a very
early date; but I think the balance of the evidence tends to show that
the “solar,” the original site of the family, was at Cervatos in the
north-west corner of Old Castile, close to the junction of Castile,
Leon, and the Asturias. As it happens, there is a complete history of
the Cervantes family from the tenth century down to the seventeenth
extant under the title of “Illustrious Ancestry, Glorious Deeds, and
Noble Posterity of the Famous Nuno Alfonso, Alcaide of Toledo,” written
in 1648 by the industrious genealogist Rodrigo Mendez Silva, who
availed himself of a manuscript genealogy by Juan de Mena, the poet
laureate and historiographer of John II.

The origin of the name Cervantes is curious. Nuno Alfonso was almost as
distinguished in the struggle against the Moors in the reign of Alfonso
VII as the Cid had been half a century before in that of Alfonso VI,
and was rewarded by divers grants of land in the neighbourhood of
Toledo. On one of his acquisitions, about two leagues from the city, he
built himself a castle which he called Cervatos, because “he was lord
of the solar of Cervatos in the Montana,” as the mountain region
extending from the Basque Provinces to Leon was always called. At his
death in battle in 1143, the castle passed by his will to his son
Alfonso Munio, who, as territorial or local surnames were then coming
into vogue in place of the simple patronymic, took the additional name
of Cervatos. His eldest son Pedro succeeded him in the possession of
the castle, and followed his example in adopting the name, an
assumption at which the younger son, Gonzalo, seems to have taken
umbrage.

Everyone who has paid even a flying visit to Toledo will remember the
ruined castle that crowns the hill above the spot where the bridge of
Alcántara spans the gorge of the Tagus, and with its broken outline and
crumbling walls makes such an admirable pendant to the square solid
Alcazar towering over the city roofs on the opposite side. It was
built, or as some say restored, by Alfonso VI shortly after his
occupation of Toledo in 1085, and called by him San Servando after a
Spanish martyr, a name subsequently modified into San Servan (in which
form it appears in the “Poem of the Cid”), San Servantes, and San
Cervantes: with regard to which last the “Handbook for Spain” warns its
readers against the supposition that it has anything to do with the
author of “Don Quixote.” Ford, as all know who have taken him for a
companion and counsellor on the roads of Spain, is seldom wrong in
matters of literature or history. In this instance, however, he is in
error. It has everything to do with the author of “Don Quixote,” for it
is in fact these old walls that have given to Spain the name she is
proudest of to-day. Gonzalo, above mentioned, it may be readily
conceived, did not relish the appropriation by his brother of a name to
which he himself had an equal right, for though nominally taken from
the castle, it was in reality derived from the ancient territorial
possession of the family, and as a set-off, and to distinguish himself
(diferenciarse) from his brother, he took as a surname the name of the
castle on the bank of the Tagus, in the building of which, according to
a family tradition, his great-grandfather had a share.

Both brothers founded families. The Cervantes branch had more tenacity;
it sent offshoots in various directions, Andalusia, Estremadura,
G