would have taken it as a bad omen and
declined to bury himself in such a place. He got up, however, and as
there came no more crows, or night-birds like the bats that flew out at
the same time with the crows, the cousin and Sancho giving him rope, he
lowered himself into the depths of the dread cavern; and as he entered
it Sancho sent his blessing after him, making a thousand crosses over
him and saying, “God, and the Peña de Francia, and the Trinity of Gaeta
guide thee, flower and cream of knights-errant. There thou goest, thou
dare-devil of the earth, heart of steel, arm of brass; once more, God
guide thee and send thee back safe, sound, and unhurt to the light of
this world thou art leaving to bury thyself in the darkness thou art
seeking there;” and the cousin offered up almost the same prayers and
supplications.



p22c.jpg (365K)

Full Size



Don Quixote kept calling to them to give him rope and more rope, and
they gave it out little by little, and by the time the calls, which
came out of the cave as out of a pipe, ceased to be heard they had let
down the hundred fathoms of rope. They were inclined to pull Don
Quixote up again, as they could give him no more rope; however, they
waited about half an hour, at the end of which time they began to
gather in the rope again with great ease and without feeling any
weight, which made them fancy Don Quixote was remaining below; and
persuaded that it was so, Sancho wept bitterly, and hauled away in
great haste in order to settle the question. When, however, they had
come to, as it seemed, rather more than eighty fathoms they felt a
weight, at which they were greatly delighted; and at last, at ten
fathoms more, they saw Don Quixote distinctly, and Sancho called out to
him, saying, “Welcome back, señor, for we had begun to think you were
going to stop there to found a family.” But Don Quixote answered not a
word, and drawing him out entirely they perceived he had his eyes shut
and every appearance of being fast asleep.

They stretched him on the ground and untied him, but still he did not
awake; however, they rolled him back and forwards and shook and pulled
him about, so that after some time he came to himself, stretching
himself just as if he were waking up from a deep and sound sleep, and
looking about him he said, “God forgive you, friends; ye have taken me
away from the sweetest and most delightful existence and spectacle that
ever human being enjoyed or beheld. Now indeed do I know that all the
pleasures of this life pass away like a shadow and a dream, or fade
like the flower of the field. O ill-fated Montesinos! O sore-wounded
Durandarte! O unhappy Belerma! O tearful Guadiana, and ye O hapless
daughters of Ruidera who show in your waves the tears that flowed from
your beauteous eyes!”



p22d.jpg (318K)

Full Size



The cousin and Sancho Panza listened with deep attention to the words
of Don Quixote, who uttered them as though with immense pain he drew
them up from his very bowels. They begged of him to explain himself,
and tell them what he had seen in that hell down there.

“Hell do you call it?” said Don Quixote; “call it by no such name, for
it does not deserve it, as ye shall soon see.”

He then begged them to give him something to eat, as he was very
hungry. They spread the cousin’s sackcloth on the grass, and put the
stores of the alforjas into requisition, and all three sitting down
lovingly and sociably, they made a luncheon and a supper of it all in
one; and when the sackcloth was removed, Don Quixote of La Mancha said,
“Let no one rise, and attend to me, my sons, both of you.”



p22e.jpg (48K)



CHAPTER XXIII.
OF THE WONDERFUL THINGS THE INCOMPARABLE DON QUIXOTE SAID HE SAW IN THE
PROFOUND CAVE OF MONTESINOS, THE IMPOSSIBILITY AND MAGNITUDE OF WHICH
CAUSE THIS ADVENTURE TO BE DEEMED APOCRYPHAL




p23a.jpg (148K)

Full Size



It was about four in the afternoon when 