dit or dishonour of the loved object. Quiteria belonged to
Basilio and Basilio to Quiteria by the just and beneficent disposal of
heaven. Camacho is rich, and can purchase his pleasure when, where, and
as it pleases him. Basilio has but this ewe-lamb, and no one, however
powerful he may be, shall take her from him; these two whom God hath
joined man cannot separate; and he who attempts it must first pass the
point of this lance;” and so saying he brandished it so stoutly and
dexterously that he overawed all who did not know him.

But so deep an impression had the rejection of Quiteria made on
Camacho’s mind that it banished her at once from his thoughts; and so
the counsels of the priest, who was a wise and kindly disposed man,
prevailed with him, and by their means he and his partisans were
pacified and tranquillised, and to prove it put up their swords again,
inveighing against the pliancy of Quiteria rather than the craftiness
of Basilio; Camacho maintaining that, if Quiteria as a maiden had such
a love for Basilio, she would have loved him too as a married woman,
and that he ought to thank heaven more for having taken her than for
having given her.

Camacho and those of his following, therefore, being consoled and
pacified, those on Basilio’s side were appeased; and the rich Camacho,
to show that he felt no resentment for the trick, and did not care
about it, desired the festival to go on just as if he were married in
reality. Neither Basilio, however, nor his bride, nor their followers
would take any part in it, and they withdrew to Basilio’s village; for
the poor, if they are persons of virtue and good sense, have those who
follow, honour, and uphold them, just as the rich have those who
flatter and dance attendance on them. With them they carried Don
Quixote, regarding him as a man of worth and a stout one. Sancho alone
had a cloud on his soul, for he found himself debarred from waiting for
Camacho’s splendid feast and festival, which lasted until night; and
thus dragged away, he moodily followed his master, who accompanied
Basilio’s party, and left behind him the flesh-pots of Egypt; though in
his heart he took them with him, and their now nearly finished
skimmings that he carried in the bucket conjured up visions before his
eyes of the glory and abundance of the good cheer he was losing. And
so, vexed and dejected though not hungry, without dismounting from
Dapple he followed in the footsteps of Rocinante.



p21c.jpg (417K)

Full Size



p21e.jpg (49K)



CHAPTER XXII.
WHEREIN IS RELATED THE GRAND ADVENTURE OF THE CAVE OF MONTESINOS IN THE
HEART OF LA MANCHA, WHICH THE VALIANT DON QUIXOTE BROUGHT TO A HAPPY
TERMINATION




p22a.jpg (112K)

Full Size



Many and great were the attentions shown to Don Quixote by the newly
married couple, who felt themselves under an obligation to him for
coming forward in defence of their cause; and they exalted his wisdom
to the same level with his courage, rating him as a Cid in arms, and a
Cicero in eloquence. Worthy Sancho enjoyed himself for three days at
the expense of the pair, from whom they learned that the sham wound was
not a scheme arranged with the fair Quiteria, but a device of
Basilio’s, who counted on exactly the result they had seen; he
confessed, it is true, that he had confided his idea to some of his
friends, so that at the proper time they might aid him in his purpose
and insure the success of the deception.



p22b.jpg (344K)

Full Size



“That,” said Don Quixote, “is not and ought not to be called deception
which aims at virtuous ends;” and the marriage of lovers he maintained
to be a most excellent end, reminding them, however, that love has no
greater enemy than hunger and constant want; for love is all gaiety,
enjoyment, and happiness, especially when the lover is in the
possession of the object of his love, and poverty and want are the
declared enemies of all these; w