
out my life by eating until it reaches the end heaven has fixed for it;
and let me tell you, señor, there’s no greater folly than to think of
dying of despair as your worship does; take my advice, and after eating
lie down and sleep a bit on this green grass-mattress, and you will see
that when you awake you’ll feel something better.”

Don Quixote did as he recommended, for it struck him that Sancho’s
reasoning was more like a philosopher’s than a blockhead’s, and said
he, “Sancho, if thou wilt do for me what I am going to tell thee my
ease of mind would be more assured and my heaviness of heart not so
great; and it is this; to go aside a little while I am sleeping in
accordance with thy advice, and, making bare thy carcase to the air, to
give thyself three or four hundred lashes with Rocinante’s reins, on
account of the three thousand and odd thou art to give thyself for the
disenchantment of Dulcinea; for it is a great pity that the poor lady
should be left enchanted through thy carelessness and negligence.”

“There is a good deal to be said on that point,” said Sancho; “let us
both go to sleep now, and after that, God has decreed what will happen.
Let me tell your worship that for a man to whip himself in cold blood
is a hard thing, especially if the stripes fall upon an ill-nourished
and worse-fed body. Let my lady Dulcinea have patience, and when she is
least expecting it, she will see me made a riddle of with whipping, and
‘until death it’s all life;’ I mean that I have still life in me, and
the desire to make good what I have promised.”

Don Quixote thanked him, and ate a little, and Sancho a good deal, and
then they both lay down to sleep, leaving those two inseparable friends
and comrades, Rocinante and Dapple, to their own devices and to feed
unrestrained upon the abundant grass with which the meadow was
furnished. They woke up rather late, mounted once more and resumed
their journey, pushing on to reach an inn which was in sight,
apparently a league off. I say an inn, because Don Quixote called it
so, contrary to his usual practice of calling all inns castles. They
reached it, and asked the landlord if they could put up there. He said
yes, with as much comfort and as good fare as they could find in
Saragossa. They dismounted, and Sancho stowed away his larder in a room
of which the landlord gave him the key. He took the beasts to the
stable, fed them, and came back to see what orders Don Quixote, who was
seated on a bench at the door, had for him, giving special thanks to
heaven that this inn had not been taken for a castle by his master.
Supper-time came, and they repaired to their room, and Sancho asked the
landlord what he had to give them for supper. To this the landlord
replied that his mouth should be the measure; he had only to ask what
he would; for that inn was provided with the birds of the air and the
fowls of the earth and the fish of the sea.

“There’s no need of all that,” said Sancho; “if they’ll roast us a
couple of chickens we’ll be satisfied, for my master is delicate and
eats little, and I’m not over and above gluttonous.”

The landlord replied he had no chickens, for the kites had stolen them.

“Well then,” said Sancho, “let señor landlord tell them to roast a
pullet, so that it is a tender one.”

“Pullet! My father!” said the landlord; “indeed and in truth it’s only
yesterday I sent over fifty to the city to sell; but saving pullets ask
what you will.”

“In that case,” said Sancho, “you will not be without veal or kid.”

“Just now,” said the landlord, “there’s none in the house, for it’s all
finished; but next week there will be enough and to spare.”

“Much good that does us,” said Sancho; “I’ll lay a bet that all these
short-comings are going to wind up in plenty of bacon and eggs.”

“By God,” said the landlord, “my guest’s wits must be precious dull; I
tell him I have neither pullets nor hens, and he wants me to have eggs!
