n it will so soon be shown whether I tell the truth or
not? Come, señor, push on, and you will see the princess our mistress
coming, robed and adorned—in fact, like what she is. Her damsels and
she are all one glow of gold, all bunches of pearls, all diamonds, all
rubies, all cloth of brocade of more than ten borders; with their hair
loose on their shoulders like so many sunbeams playing with the wind;
and moreover, they come mounted on three piebald cackneys, the finest
sight ever you saw.”

“Hackneys, you mean, Sancho,” said Don Quixote.

“There is not much difference between cackneys and hackneys,” said
Sancho; “but no matter what they come on, there they are, the finest
ladies one could wish for, especially my lady the princess Dulcinea,
who staggers one’s senses.”

“Let us go, Sancho, my son,” said Don Quixote, “and in guerdon of this
news, as unexpected as it is good, I bestow upon thee the best spoil I
shall win in the first adventure I may have; or if that does not
satisfy thee, I promise thee the foals I shall have this year from my
three mares that thou knowest are in foal on our village common.”

“I’ll take the foals,” said Sancho; “for it is not quite certain that
the spoils of the first adventure will be good ones.”

By this time they had cleared the wood, and saw the three village
lasses close at hand. Don Quixote looked all along the road to El
Toboso, and as he could see nobody except the three peasant girls, he
was completely puzzled, and asked Sancho if it was outside the city he
had left them.

“How outside the city?” returned Sancho. “Are your worship’s eyes in
the back of your head, that you can’t see that they are these who are
coming here, shining like the very sun at noonday?”

“I see nothing, Sancho,” said Don Quixote, “but three country girls on
three jackasses.”

“Now, may God deliver me from the devil!” said Sancho, “and can it be
that your worship takes three hackneys—or whatever they’re called—as
white as the driven snow, for jackasses? By the Lord, I could tear my
beard if that was the case!”

“Well, I can only say, Sancho, my friend,” said Don Quixote, “that it
is as plain they are jackasses—or jennyasses—as that I am Don Quixote,
and thou Sancho Panza: at any rate, they seem to me to be so.”

“Hush, señor,” said Sancho, “don’t talk that way, but open your eyes,
and come and pay your respects to the lady of your thoughts, who is
close upon us now;” and with these words he advanced to receive the
three village lasses, and dismounting from Dapple, caught hold of one
of the asses of the three country girls by the halter, and dropping on
both knees on the ground, he said, “Queen and princess and duchess of
beauty, may it please your haughtiness and greatness to receive into
your favour and good-will your captive knight who stands there turned
into marble stone, and quite stupefied and benumbed at finding himself
in your magnificent presence. I am Sancho Panza, his squire, and he the
vagabond knight Don Quixote of La Mancha, otherwise called ‘The Knight
of the Rueful Countenance.’”

Don Quixote had by this time placed himself on his knees beside Sancho,
and, with eyes starting out of his head and a puzzled gaze, was
regarding her whom Sancho called queen and lady; and as he could see
nothing in her except a village lass, and not a very well-favoured one,
for she was platter-faced and snub-nosed, he was perplexed and
bewildered, and did not venture to open his lips. The country girls, at
the same time, were astonished to see these two men, so different in
appearance, on their knees, preventing their companion from going on.
She, however, who had been stopped, breaking silence, said angrily and
testily, “Get out of the way, bad luck to you, and let us pass, for we
are in a hurry.”



p10b.jpg (319K)

Full Size



To which Sancho returned, “Oh, princess and universal lady of El
Toboso, is not your magnanimous heart softened