ore-room, and at the entrance the cellar, with plenty of wine-jars
standing round, which, coming from El Toboso, brought back to his
memory his enchanted and transformed Dulcinea; and with a sigh, and not
thinking of what he was saying, or in whose presence he was, he
exclaimed-

“O ye sweet treasures, to my sorrow found!
Once sweet and welcome when ’twas heaven’s good-will.

“O ye Tobosan jars, how ye bring back to my memory the
sweet object of my bitter regrets!”



p18b.jpg (300K)

Full Size



The student poet, Don Diego’s son, who had come out with his mother to
receive him, heard this exclamation, and both mother and son were
filled with amazement at the extraordinary figure he presented; he,
however, dismounting from Rocinante, advanced with great politeness to
ask permission to kiss the lady’s hand, while Don Diego said, “Señora,
pray receive with your wonted kindness Señor Don Quixote of La Mancha,
whom you see before you, a knight-errant, and the bravest and wisest in
the world.”

The lady, whose name was Doña Christina, received him with every sign
of good-will and great courtesy, and Don Quixote placed himself at her
service with an abundance of well-chosen and polished phrases. Almost
the same civilities were exchanged between him and the student, who
listening to Don Quixote, took him to be a sensible, clear-headed
person.

Here the author describes minutely everything belonging to Don Diego’s
mansion, putting before us in his picture the whole contents of a rich
gentleman-farmer’s house; but the translator of the history thought it
best to pass over these and other details of the same sort in silence,
as they are not in harmony with the main purpose of the story, the
strong point of which is truth rather than dull digressions.

They led Don Quixote into a room, and Sancho removed his armour,
leaving him in loose Walloon breeches and chamois-leather doublet, all
stained with the rust of his armour; his collar was a falling one of
scholastic cut, without starch or lace, his buskins buff-coloured, and
his shoes polished. He wore his good sword, which hung in a baldric of
sea-wolf’s skin, for he had suffered for many years, they say, from an
ailment of the kidneys; and over all he threw a long cloak of good grey
cloth. But first of all, with five or six buckets of water (for as
regard the number of buckets there is some dispute), he washed his head
and face, and still the water remained whey-coloured, thanks to
Sancho’s greediness and purchase of those unlucky curds that turned his
master so white. Thus arrayed, and with an easy, sprightly, and gallant
air, Don Quixote passed out into another room, where the student was
waiting to entertain him while the table was being laid; for on the
arrival of so distinguished a guest, Doña Christina was anxious to show
that she knew how and was able to give a becoming reception to those
who came to her house.

While Don Quixote was taking off his armour, Don Lorenzo (for so Don
Diego’s son was called) took the opportunity to say to his father,
“What are we to make of this gentleman you have brought home to us,
sir? For his name, his appearance, and your describing him as a
knight-errant have completely puzzled my mother and me.”

“I don’t know what to say, my son,” replied. Don Diego; “all I can tell
thee is that I have seen him act the acts of the greatest madman in the
world, and heard him make observations so sensible that they efface and
undo all he does; do thou talk to him and feel the pulse of his wits,
and as thou art shrewd, form the most reasonable conclusion thou canst
as to his wisdom or folly; though, to tell the truth, I am more
inclined to take him to be mad than sane.”

With this Don Lorenzo went away to entertain Don Quixote as has been
said, and in the course of the conversation that passed between them
Don Quixote said to Don Lorenzo, “Your father, Señor Don Diego de
Miranda, has to