 scented them, he, without
asking leave of his master, got up a briskish little trot and hastened
to make known his wishes to them; they, however, it seemed, preferred
their pasture to him, and received him with their heels and teeth to
such effect that they soon broke his girths and left him naked without
a saddle to cover him; but what must have been worse to him was that
the carriers, seeing the violence he was offering to their mares, came
running up armed with stakes, and so belaboured him that they brought
him sorely battered to the ground.

By this time Don Quixote and Sancho, who had witnessed the drubbing of
Rocinante, came up panting, and said Don Quixote to Sancho:

“So far as I can see, friend Sancho, these are not knights but base
folk of low birth: I mention it because thou canst lawfully aid me in
taking due vengeance for the insult offered to Rocinante before our
eyes.”

“What the devil vengeance can we take,” answered Sancho, “if they are
more than twenty, and we no more than two, or, indeed, perhaps not more
than one and a half?”

“I count for a hundred,” replied Don Quixote, and without more words he
drew his sword and attacked the Yanguesans and excited and impelled by
the example of his master, Sancho did the same; and to begin with, Don
Quixote delivered a slash at one of them that laid open the leather
jerkin he wore, together with a great portion of his shoulder. The
Yanguesans, seeing themselves assaulted by only two men while they were
so many, betook themselves to their stakes, and driving the two into
the middle they began to lay on with great zeal and energy; in fact, at
the second blow they brought Sancho to the ground, and Don Quixote
fared the same way, all his skill and high mettle availing him nothing,
and fate willed it that he should fall at the feet of Rocinante, who
had not yet risen; whereby it may be seen how furiously stakes can
pound in angry boorish hands.



c15c.jpg (362K)

Full Size




Then, seeing the mischief they had done, the Yanguesans with all the
haste they could loaded their team and pursued their journey, leaving
the two adventurers a sorry sight and in sorrier mood.

Sancho was the first to come to, and finding himself close to his
master he called to him in a weak and doleful voice, “Señor Don
Quixote, ah, Señor Don Quixote!”

“What wouldst thou, brother Sancho?” answered Don Quixote in the same
feeble suffering tone as Sancho.

“I would like, if it were possible,” answered Sancho Panza, “your
worship to give me a couple of sups of that potion of the fiery Blas,
if it be that you have any to hand there; perhaps it will serve for
broken bones as well as for wounds.”

“If I only had it here, wretch that I am, what more should we want?”
said Don Quixote; “but I swear to thee, Sancho Panza, on the faith of a
knight-errant, ere two days are over, unless fortune orders otherwise,
I mean to have it in my possession, or my hand will have lost its
cunning.”

“But in how many does your worship think we shall have the use of our
feet?” answered Sancho Panza.

“For myself I must say I cannot guess how many,” said the battered
knight Don Quixote; “but I take all the blame upon myself, for I had no
business to put hand to sword against men who where not dubbed knights
like myself, and so I believe that in punishment for having
transgressed the laws of chivalry the God of battles has permitted this
chastisement to be administered to me; for which reason, brother
Sancho, it is well thou shouldst receive a hint on the matter which I
am now about to mention to thee, for it is of much importance to the
welfare of both of us. It is that when thou shalt see rabble of this
sort offering us insult thou art not to wait till I draw sword against
them, for I shall not do so at all; but do thou draw sword and chastise
them to thy heart’s content, and if any knights come to their aid and
defence I will take care to d