 the stitches of which he would have even taken up with
silk of another colour, which is one of the greatest signs of poverty a
gentleman can show in the course of his never-failing embarrassments.
He put out the candles; but the night was warm and he could not sleep;
he rose from his bed and opened slightly a grated window that looked
out on a beautiful garden, and as he did so he perceived and heard
people walking and talking in the garden. He set himself to listen
attentively, and those below raised their voices so that he could hear
these words:

“Urge me not to sing, Emerencia, for thou knowest that ever since this
stranger entered the castle and my eyes beheld him, I cannot sing but
only weep; besides my lady is a light rather than a heavy sleeper, and
I would not for all the wealth of the world that she found us here; and
even if she were asleep and did not waken, my singing would be in vain,
if this strange Æneas, who has come into my neighbourhood to flout me,
sleeps on and wakens not to hear it.”

“Heed not that, dear Altisidora,” replied a voice; “the duchess is no
doubt asleep, and everybody in the house save the lord of thy heart and
disturber of thy soul; for just now I perceived him open the grated
window of his chamber, so he must be awake; sing, my poor sufferer, in
a low sweet tone to the accompaniment of thy harp; and even if the
duchess hears us we can lay the blame on the heat of the night.”

“That is not the point, Emerencia,” replied Altisidora, “it is that I
would not that my singing should lay bare my heart, and that I should
be thought a light and wanton maiden by those who know not the mighty
power of love; but come what may; better a blush on the cheeks than a
sore in the heart;” and here a harp softly touched made itself heard.
As he listened to all this Don Quixote was in a state of breathless
amazement, for immediately the countless adventures like this, with
windows, gratings, gardens, serenades, lovemakings, and languishings,
that he had read of in his trashy books of chivalry, came to his mind.
He at once concluded that some damsel of the duchess’s was in love with
him, and that her modesty forced her to keep her passion secret. He
trembled lest he should fall, and made an inward resolution not to
yield; and commending himself with all his might and soul to his lady
Dulcinea he made up his mind to listen to the music; and to let them
know he was there he gave a pretended sneeze, at which the damsels were
not a little delighted, for all they wanted was that Don Quixote should
hear them. So having tuned the harp, Altisidora, running her hand
across the strings, began this ballad:

O thou that art above in bed,
    Between the holland sheets,
A-lying there from night till morn,
    With outstretched legs asleep;

O thou, most valiant knight of all
    The famed Manchegan breed,
Of purity and virtue more
    Than gold of Araby;

Give ear unto a suffering maid,
    Well-grown but evil-starr’d,
For those two suns of thine have lit
    A fire within her heart.

Adventures seeking thou dost rove,
    To others bringing woe;
Thou scatterest wounds, but, ah, the balm
    To heal them dost withhold!

Say, valiant youth, and so may God
    Thy enterprises speed,
Didst thou the light mid Libya’s sands
    Or Jaca’s rocks first see?

Did scaly serpents give thee suck?
    Who nursed thee when a babe?
Wert cradled in the forest rude,
    Or gloomy mountain cave?

O Dulcinea may be proud,
    That plump and lusty maid;
For she alone hath had the power
    A tiger fierce to tame.

And she for this shall famous be
    From Tagus to Jarama,
From Manzanares to Genil,
    From Duero to Arlanza.

Fain would I change with her, and give
    A petticoat to boot,
The best and bravest that I have,
    All trimmed with gold galloon.

O for to be the happy fair
    Thy mighty arms enfold,
Or even sit beside thy bed
    And scratch 