the forest enjoying himself; the government would go on
badly in that fashion. By my faith, señor, hunting and amusements are
more fit for idlers than for governors; what I intend to amuse myself
with is playing all fours at Eastertime, and bowls on Sundays and
holidays; for these huntings don’t suit my condition or agree with my
conscience.”

“God grant it may turn out so,” said the duke; “because it’s a long
step from saying to doing.”

“Be that as it may,” said Sancho, “‘pledges don’t distress a good
payer,’ and ‘he whom God helps does better than he who gets up early,’
and ‘it’s the tripes that carry the feet and not the feet the tripes;’
I mean to say that if God gives me help and I do my duty honestly, no
doubt I’ll govern better than a gerfalcon. Nay, let them only put a
finger in my mouth, and they’ll see whether I can bite or not.”

“The curse of God and all his saints upon thee, thou accursed Sancho!”
exclaimed Don Quixote; “when will the day come—as I have often said to
thee—when I shall hear thee make one single coherent, rational remark
without proverbs? Pray, your highnesses, leave this fool alone, for he
will grind your souls between, not to say two, but two thousand
proverbs, dragged in as much in season, and as much to the purpose
as—may God grant as much health to him, or to me if I want to listen to
them!”

“Sancho Panza’s proverbs,” said the duchess, “though more in number
than the Greek Commander’s, are not therefore less to be esteemed for
the conciseness of the maxims. For my own part, I can say they give me
more pleasure than others that may be better brought in and more
seasonably introduced.”

In pleasant conversation of this sort they passed out of the tent into
the wood, and the day was spent in visiting some of the posts and
hiding-places, and then night closed in, not, however, as brilliantly
or tranquilly as might have been expected at the season, for it was
then midsummer; but bringing with it a kind of haze that greatly aided
the project of the duke and duchess; and thus, as night began to fall,
and a little after twilight set in, suddenly the whole wood on all four
sides seemed to be on fire, and shortly after, here, there, on all
sides, a vast number of trumpets and other military instruments were
heard, as if several troops of cavalry were passing through the wood.
The blaze of the fire and the noise of the warlike instruments almost
blinded the eyes and deafened the ears of those that stood by, and
indeed of all who were in the wood. Then there were heard repeated
lelilies after the fashion of the Moors when they rush to battle;
trumpets and clarions brayed, drums beat, fifes played, so unceasingly
and so fast that he could not have had any senses who did not lose them
with the confused din of so many instruments. The duke was astounded,
the duchess amazed, Don Quixote wondering, Sancho Panza trembling, and
indeed, even they who were aware of the cause were frightened. In their
fear, silence fell upon them, and a postillion, in the guise of a
demon, passed in front of them, blowing, in lieu of a bugle, a huge
hollow horn that gave out a horrible hoarse note.

“Ho there! brother courier,” cried the duke, “who are you? Where are
you going? What troops are these that seem to be passing through the
wood?”

To which the courier replied in a harsh, discordant voice, “I am the
devil; I am in search of Don Quixote of La Mancha; those who are coming
this way are six troops of enchanters, who are bringing on a triumphal
car the peerless Dulcinea del Toboso; she comes under enchantment,
together with the gallant Frenchman Montesinos, to give instructions to
Don Quixote as to how, she the said lady, may be disenchanted.”

“If you were the devil, as you say and as your appearance indicates,”
said the duke, “you would have known the said knight Don Quixote of La
Mancha, for you have him here before you.”

“By God and upon my conscience