st, “Wit” of the second, “Birth” of the
third, and “Valour” of the fourth. Those that followed Interest were
distinguished in the same way; the badge of the first announced
“Liberality,” that of the second “Largess,” the third “Treasure,” and
the fourth “Peaceful Possession.” In front of them all came a wooden
castle drawn by four wild men, all clad in ivy and hemp stained green,
and looking so natural that they nearly terrified Sancho. On the front
of the castle and on each of the four sides of its frame it bore the
inscription “Castle of Caution.” Four skillful tabor and flute players
accompanied them, and the dance having been opened, Cupid, after
executing two figures, raised his eyes and bent his bow against a
damsel who stood between the turrets of the castle, and thus addressed
her:

I am the mighty God whose sway
Is potent over land and sea.
The heavens above us own me; nay,
The shades below acknowledge me.
I know not fear, I have my will,
Whate’er my whim or fancy be;
For me there’s no impossible,
I order, bind, forbid, set free.


Having concluded the stanza he discharged an arrow at the top of the
castle, and went back to his place. Interest then came forward and went
through two more figures, and as soon as the tabors ceased, he said:

But mightier than Love am I,
Though Love it be that leads me on,
Than mine no lineage is more high,
Or older, underneath the sun.
To use me rightly few know how,
To act without me fewer still,
For I am Interest, and I vow
For evermore to do thy will.


Interest retired, and Poetry came forward, and when she had gone
through her figures like the others, fixing her eyes on the damsel of
the castle, she said:

With many a fanciful conceit,
Fair Lady, winsome Poesy
Her soul, an offering at thy feet,
Presents in sonnets unto thee.
If thou my homage wilt not scorn,
Thy fortune, watched by envious eyes,
On wings of poesy upborne
Shall be exalted to the skies.


Poetry withdrew, and on the side of Interest Liberality advanced, and
after having gone through her figures, said:

To give, while shunning each extreme,
The sparing hand, the over-free,
Therein consists, so wise men deem,
The virtue Liberality.
But thee, fair lady, to enrich,
Myself a prodigal I’ll prove,
A vice not wholly shameful, which
May find its fair excuse in love.


In the same manner all the characters of the two bands advanced and
retired, and each executed its figures, and delivered its verses, some
of them graceful, some burlesque, but Don Quixote’s memory (though he
had an excellent one) only carried away those that have been just
quoted. All then mingled together, forming chains and breaking off
again with graceful, unconstrained gaiety; and whenever Love passed in
front of the castle he shot his arrows up at it, while Interest broke
gilded pellets against it. At length, after they had danced a good
while, Interest drew out a great purse, made of the skin of a large
brindled cat and to all appearance full of money, and flung it at the
castle, and with the force of the blow the boards fell asunder and
tumbled down, leaving the damsel exposed and unprotected. Interest and
the characters of his band advanced, and throwing a great chain of gold
over her neck pretended to take her and lead her away captive, on
seeing which, Love and his supporters made as though they would release
her, the whole action being to the accompaniment of the tabors and in
the form of a regular dance. The wild men made peace between them, and
with great dexterity readjusted and fixed the boards of the castle, and
the damsel once more ensconced herself within; and with this the dance
wound up, to the great enjoyment of the beholders.

Don Quixote asked one of the nymphs who it was that had composed and
arranged it. She replied that it was a beneficiary of the town who had
a nice taste in devising things of the sort. “I will lay a wager,” said
Don Quixote, “that