lse are not in the habit of
throwing open the fortress until the sun’s rays are spread over the
whole surface of the earth. Withdraw to a distance, and wait till it is
broad daylight, and then we shall see whether it will be proper or not
to open to you.”

“What the devil fortress or castle is this,” said one, “to make us
stand on such ceremony? If you are the innkeeper bid them open to us;
we are travellers who only want to feed our horses and go on, for we
are in haste.”

“Do you think, gentlemen, that I look like an innkeeper?” said Don
Quixote.

“I don’t know what you look like,” replied the other; “but I know that
you are talking nonsense when you call this inn a castle.”

“A castle it is,” returned Don Quixote, “nay, more, one of the best in
this whole province, and it has within it people who have had the
sceptre in the hand and the crown on the head.”

“It would be better if it were the other way,” said the traveller, “the
sceptre on the head and the crown in the hand; but if so, maybe there
is within some company of players, with whom it is a common thing to
have those crowns and sceptres you speak of; for in such a small inn as
this, and where such silence is kept, I do not believe any people
entitled to crowns and sceptres can have taken up their quarters.”

“You know but little of the world,” returned Don Quixote, “since you
are ignorant of what commonly occurs in knight-errantry.”

But the comrades of the spokesman, growing weary of the dialogue with
Don Quixote, renewed their knocks with great vehemence, so much so that
the host, and not only he but everybody in the inn, awoke, and he got
up to ask who knocked. It happened at this moment that one of the
horses of the four who were seeking admittance went to smell Rocinante,
who melancholy, dejected, and with drooping ears stood motionless,
supporting his sorely stretched master; and as he was, after all,
flesh, though he looked as if he were made of wood, he could not help
giving way and in return smelling the one who had come to offer him
attentions. But he had hardly moved at all when Don Quixote lost his
footing; and slipping off the saddle, he would have come to the ground,
but for being suspended by the arm, which caused him such agony that he
believed either his wrist would be cut through or his arm torn off; and
he hung so near the ground that he could just touch it with his feet,
which was all the worse for him; for, finding how little was wanted to
enable him to plant his feet firmly, he struggled and stretched himself
as much as he could to gain a footing; just like those undergoing the
torture of the strappado, when they are fixed at “touch and no touch,”
who aggravate their own sufferings by their violent efforts to stretch
themselves, deceived by the hope which makes them fancy that with a
very little more they will reach the ground.



c43b.jpg (272K)

Full Size



c43e.jpg (20K)



CHAPTER XLIV.
IN WHICH ARE CONTINUED THE UNHEARD-OF ADVENTURES OF THE INN




c44a.jpg (144K)

Full Size




So loud, in fact, were the shouts of Don Quixote, that the landlord
opening the gate of the inn in all haste, came out in dismay, and ran
to see who was uttering such cries, and those who were outside joined
him. Maritornes, who had been by this time roused up by the same
outcry, suspecting what it was, ran to the loft and, without anyone
seeing her, untied the halter by which Don Quixote was suspended, and
down he came to the ground in the sight of the landlord and the
travellers, who approaching asked him what was the matter with him that
he shouted so. He without replying a word took the rope off his wrist,
and rising to his feet leaped upon Rocinante, braced his buckler on his
arm, put his lance in rest, and making a considerable circuit of the
plain came back at a half-gallop exclaiming:

“Whoever shall say that I have been enchanted with just cause, provided
my lady t