he thought aside I fling,
And to the present fondly cling,
And dread the time that is to be.”


When Don Lorenzo had finished reciting his gloss, Don Quixote stood up,
and in a loud voice, almost a shout, exclaimed as he grasped Don
Lorenzo’s right hand in his, “By the highest heavens, noble youth, but
you are the best poet on earth, and deserve to be crowned with laurel,
not by Cyprus or by Gaeta—as a certain poet, God forgive him, said—but
by the Academies of Athens, if they still flourished, and by those that
flourish now, Paris, Bologna, Salamanca. Heaven grant that the judges
who rob you of the first prize—that Phœbus may pierce them with his
arrows, and the Muses never cross the thresholds of their doors. Repeat
me some of your long-measure verses, señor, if you will be so good, for
I want thoroughly to feel the pulse of your rare genius.”

Is there any need to say that Don Lorenzo enjoyed hearing himself
praised by Don Quixote, albeit he looked upon him as a madman? power of
flattery, how far-reaching art thou, and how wide are the bounds of thy
pleasant jurisdiction! Don Lorenzo gave a proof of it, for he complied
with Don Quixote’s request and entreaty, and repeated to him this
sonnet on the fable or story of Pyramus and Thisbe.

SONNET

The lovely maid, she pierces now the wall;
Heart-pierced by her young Pyramus doth lie;
And Love spreads wing from Cyprus isle to fly,
A chink to view so wondrous great and small.
There silence speaketh, for no voice at all
Can pass so strait a strait; but love will ply
Where to all other power ’twere vain to try;
For love will find a way whate’er befall.
Impatient of delay, with reckless pace
The rash maid wins the fatal spot where she
Sinks not in lover’s arms but death’s embrace.
So runs the strange tale, how the lovers twain
One sword, one sepulchre, one memory,
Slays, and entombs, and brings to life again.


“Blessed be God,” said Don Quixote when he had heard Don Lorenzo’s
sonnet, “that among the hosts there are of irritable poets I have found
one consummate one, which, señor, the art of this sonnet proves to me
that you are!”

For four days was Don Quixote most sumptuously entertained in Don
Diego’s house, at the end of which time he asked his permission to
depart, telling him he thanked him for the kindness and hospitality he
had received in his house, but that, as it did not become
knights-errant to give themselves up for long to idleness and luxury,
he was anxious to fulfill the duties of his calling in seeking
adventures, of which he was informed there was an abundance in that
neighbourhood, where he hoped to employ his time until the day came
round for the jousts at Saragossa, for that was his proper destination;
and that, first of all, he meant to enter the cave of Montesinos, of
which so many marvellous things were reported all through the country,
and at the same time to investigate and explore the origin and true
source of the seven lakes commonly called the lakes of Ruidera.

Don Diego and his son commended his laudable resolution, and bade him
furnish himself with all he wanted from their house and belongings, as
they would most gladly be of service to him; which, indeed, his
personal worth and his honourable profession made incumbent upon them.

The day of his departure came at length, as welcome to Don Quixote as
it was sad and sorrowful to Sancho Panza, who was very well satisfied
with the abundance of Don Diego’s house, and objected to return to the
starvation of the woods and wilds and the short-commons of his
ill-stocked alforjas; these, however, he filled and packed with what he
considered needful. On taking leave, Don Quixote said to Don Lorenzo,
“I know not whether I have told you already, but if I have I tell you
once more, that if you wish to spare yourself fatigue and toil in
reaching the inaccessible summit of the temple of fame, you have
nothing to do but to turn aside out of the