r in the one
Cide Hamete Benengeli wrote, who are ourselves; my master valiant,
wise, and true in love, and I simple, droll, and neither glutton nor
drunkard.”

“I believe it,” said Don Juan; “and were it possible, an order should
be issued that no one should have the presumption to deal with anything
relating to Don Quixote, save his original author Cide Hamete; just as
Alexander commanded that no one should presume to paint his portrait
save Apelles.”



p60b.jpg (336K)

Full Size



“Let him who will paint me,” said Don Quixote; “but let him not abuse
me; for patience will often break down when they heap insults upon it.”

“None can be offered to Señor Don Quixote,” said Don Juan, “that he
himself will not be able to avenge, if he does not ward it off with the
shield of his patience, which, I take it, is great and strong.”

A considerable portion of the night passed in conversation of this
sort, and though Don Juan wished Don Quixote to read more of the book
to see what it was all about, he was not to be prevailed upon, saying
that he treated it as read and pronounced it utterly silly; and, if by
any chance it should come to its author’s ears that he had it in his
hand, he did not want him to flatter himself with the idea that he had
read it; for our thoughts, and still more our eyes, should keep
themselves aloof from what is obscene and filthy.

They asked him whither he meant to direct his steps. He replied, to
Saragossa, to take part in the harness jousts which were held in that
city every year. Don Juan told him that the new history described how
Don Quixote, let him be who he might, took part there in a tilting at
the ring, utterly devoid of invention, poor in mottoes, very poor in
costume, though rich in sillinesses.

“For that very reason,” said Don Quixote, “I will not set foot in
Saragossa; and by that means I shall expose to the world the lie of
this new history writer, and people will see that I am not the Don
Quixote he speaks of.”

“You will do quite right,” said Don Jeronimo; “and there are other
jousts at Barcelona in which Señor Don Quixote may display his
prowess.”

“That is what I mean to do,” said Don Quixote; “and as it is now time,
I pray your worships to give me leave to retire to bed, and to place
and retain me among the number of your greatest friends and servants.”

“And me too,” said Sancho; “maybe I’ll be good for something.”

With this they exchanged farewells, and Don Quixote and Sancho retired
to their room, leaving Don Juan and Don Jeronimo amazed to see the
medley he made of his good sense and his craziness; and they felt
thoroughly convinced that these, and not those their Aragonese author
described, were the genuine Don Quixote and Sancho. Don Quixote rose
betimes, and bade adieu to his hosts by knocking at the partition of
the other room. Sancho paid the landlord magnificently, and recommended
him either to say less about the providing of his inn or to keep it
better provided.



p59e.jpg (48K)



CHAPTER LX.
OF WHAT HAPPENED DON QUIXOTE ON HIS WAY TO BARCELONA




p60a.jpg (129K)

Full Size



It was a fresh morning giving promise of a cool day as Don Quixote
quitted the inn, first of all taking care to ascertain the most direct
road to Barcelona without touching upon Saragossa; so anxious was he to
make out this new historian, who they said abused him so, to be a liar.
Well, as it fell out, nothing worthy of being recorded happened him for
six days, at the end of which, having turned aside out of the road, he
was overtaken by night in a thicket of oak or cork trees; for on this
point Cide Hamete is not as precise as he usually is on other matters.

Master and man dismounted from their beasts, and as soon as they had
settled themselves at the foot of the trees, Sancho, who had had a good
noontide meal that day, let himself, without more ado, pass the gates
of sleep. But Don Quixote, whom his t