wrong. Observe, too,
that the stately Moor who is in that corridor is King Marsilio of
Sansueña, who, having seen the Moor’s insolence, at once orders him
(though his kinsman and a great favourite of his) to be seized and
given two hundred lashes, while carried through the streets of the city
according to custom, with criers going before him and officers of
justice behind; and here you see them come out to execute the sentence,
although the offence has been scarcely committed; for among the Moors
there are no indictments nor remands as with us.”

Here Don Quixote called out, “Child, child, go straight on with your
story, and don’t run into curves and slants, for to establish a fact
clearly there is need of a great deal of proof and confirmation;” and
said Master Pedro from within, “Boy, stick to your text and do as the
gentleman bids you; it’s the best plan; keep to your plain song, and
don’t attempt harmonies, for they are apt to break down from being over
fine.”

“I will,” said the boy, and he went on to say, “This figure that you
see here on horseback, covered with a Gascon cloak, is Don Gaiferos
himself, whom his wife, now avenged of the insult of the amorous Moor,
and taking her stand on the balcony of the tower with a calmer and more
tranquil countenance, has perceived without recognising him; and she
addresses her husband, supposing him to be some traveller, and holds
with him all that conversation and colloquy in the ballad that runs—

If you, sir knight, to France are bound,
Oh! for Gaiferos ask—


which I do not repeat here because prolixity begets disgust; suffice it
to observe how Don Gaiferos discovers himself, and that by her joyful
gestures Melisendra shows us she has recognised him; and what is more,
we now see she lowers herself from the balcony to place herself on the
haunches of her good husband’s horse. But ah! unhappy lady, the edge of
her petticoat has caught on one of the bars of the balcony and she is
left hanging in the air, unable to reach the ground. But you see how
compassionate heaven sends aid in our sorest need; Don Gaiferos
advances, and without minding whether the rich petticoat is torn or
not, he seizes her and by force brings her to the ground, and then with
one jerk places her on the haunches of his horse, astraddle like a man,
and bids her hold on tight and clasp her arms round his neck, crossing
them on his breast so as not to fall, for the lady Melisendra was not
used to that style of riding. You see, too, how the neighing of the
horse shows his satisfaction with the gallant and beautiful burden he
bears in his lord and lady. You see how they wheel round and quit the
city, and in joy and gladness take the road to Paris. Go in peace, O
peerless pair of true lovers! May you reach your longed-for fatherland
in safety, and may fortune interpose no impediment to your prosperous
journey; may the eyes of your friends and kinsmen behold you enjoying
in peace and tranquillity the remaining days of your life—and that they
may be as many as those of Nestor!”

Here Master Pedro called out again and said, “Simplicity, boy! None of
your high flights; all affectation is bad.”

The interpreter made no answer, but went on to say, “There was no want
of idle eyes, that see everything, to see Melisendra come down and
mount, and word was brought to King Marsilio, who at once gave orders
to sound the alarm; and see what a stir there is, and how the city is
drowned with the sound of the bells pealing in the towers of all the
mosques.”

“Nay, nay,” said Don Quixote at this; “on that point of the bells
Master Pedro is very inaccurate, for bells are not in use among the
Moors; only kettledrums, and a kind of small trumpet somewhat like our
clarion; to ring bells this way in Sansueña is unquestionably a great
absurdity.”

On hearing this, Master Pedro stopped ringing, and said, “Don’t look
into trifles, Señor Don Quixote, or want to have things u