ighbours; but leave me to despatch these
skimmings, for all the rest is only idle talk that we shall be called
to account for in the other world;” and so saying, he began a fresh
attack on the bucket, with such a hearty appetite that he aroused Don
Quixote’s, who no doubt would have helped him had he not been prevented
by what must be told farther on.



p20f.jpg (41K)



CHAPTER XXI.
IN WHICH CAMACHO’S WEDDING IS CONTINUED, WITH OTHER DELIGHTFUL
INCIDENTS




p21a.jpg (118K)

Full Size



While Don Quixote and Sancho were engaged in the discussion set forth
the last chapter, they heard loud shouts and a great noise, which were
uttered and made by the men on the mares as they went at full gallop,
shouting, to receive the bride and bridegroom, who were approaching
with musical instruments and pageantry of all sorts around them, and
accompanied by the priest and the relatives of both, and all the most
distinguished people of the surrounding villages. When Sancho saw the
bride, he exclaimed, “By my faith, she is not dressed like a country
girl, but like some fine court lady; egad, as well as I can make out,
the patena she wears rich coral, and her green Cuenca stuff is
thirty-pile velvet; and then the white linen trimming—by my oath, but
it’s satin! Look at her hands—jet rings on them! May I never have luck
if they’re not gold rings, and real gold, and set with pearls as white
as a curdled milk, and every one of them worth an eye of one’s head!
Whoreson baggage, what hair she has! if it’s not a wig, I never saw
longer or fairer all the days of my life. See how bravely she bears
herself—and her shape! Wouldn’t you say she was like a walking palm
tree loaded with clusters of dates? for the trinkets she has hanging
from her hair and neck look just like them. I swear in my heart she is
a brave lass, and fit ‘to pass over the banks of Flanders.’”

Don Quixote laughed at Sancho’s boorish eulogies and thought that,
saving his lady Dulcinea del Toboso, he had never seen a more beautiful
woman. The fair Quiteria appeared somewhat pale, which was, no doubt,
because of the bad night brides always pass dressing themselves out for
their wedding on the morrow. They advanced towards a theatre that stood
on one side of the meadow decked with carpets and boughs, where they
were to plight their troth, and from which they were to behold the
dances and plays; but at the moment of their arrival at the spot they
heard a loud outcry behind them, and a voice exclaiming, “Wait a
little, ye, as inconsiderate as ye are hasty!” At these words all
turned round, and perceived that the speaker was a man clad in what
seemed to be a loose black coat garnished with crimson patches like
flames. He was crowned (as was presently seen) with a crown of gloomy
cypress, and in his hand he held a long staff. As he approached he was
recognised by everyone as the gay Basilio, and all waited anxiously to
see what would come of his words, in dread of some catastrophe in
consequence of his appearance at such a moment. He came up at last
weary and breathless, and planting himself in front of the bridal pair,
drove his staff, which had a steel spike at the end, into the ground,
and, with a pale face and eyes fixed on Quiteria, he thus addressed her
in a hoarse, trembling voice:

“Well dost thou know, ungrateful Quiteria, that according to the holy
law we acknowledge, so long as live thou canst take no husband; nor art
thou ignorant either that, in my hopes that time and my own exertions
would improve my fortunes, I have never failed to observe the respect
due to thy honour; but thou, casting behind thee all thou owest to my
true love, wouldst surrender what is mine to another whose wealth
serves to bring him not only good fortune but supreme happiness; and
now to complete it (not that I think he deserves it, but inasmuch as
heaven is pleased to bestow it upon him), I will, with my own hands, do
away w