r that has been extended to me here, and unable to make a
return in the same measure, restricted as I am by the narrow limits of
my power, offer what I can and what I have to offer in my own way; and
so I declare that for two full days I will maintain in the middle of
this highway leading to Saragossa, that these ladies disguised as
shepherdesses, who are here present, are the fairest and most courteous
maidens in the world, excepting only the peerless Dulcinea del Toboso,
sole mistress of my thoughts, be it said without offence to those who
hear me, ladies and gentlemen.”

On hearing this Sancho, who had been listening with great attention,
cried out in a loud voice, “Is it possible there is anyone in the world
who will dare to say and swear that this master of mine is a madman?
Say, gentlemen shepherds, is there a village priest, be he ever so wise
or learned, who could say what my master has said; or is there
knight-errant, whatever renown he may have as a man of valour, that
could offer what my master has offered now?”

Don Quixote turned upon Sancho, and with a countenance glowing with
anger said to him, “Is it possible, Sancho, there is anyone in the
whole world who will say thou art not a fool, with a lining to match,
and I know not what trimmings of impertinence and roguery? Who asked
thee to meddle in my affairs, or to inquire whether I am a wise man or
a blockhead? Hold thy peace; answer me not a word; saddle Rocinante if
he be unsaddled; and let us go to put my offer into execution; for with
the right that I have on my side thou mayest reckon as vanquished all
who shall venture to question it;” and in a great rage, and showing his
anger plainly, he rose from his seat, leaving the company lost in
wonder, and making them feel doubtful whether they ought to regard him
as a madman or a rational being. In the end, though they sought to
dissuade him from involving himself in such a challenge, assuring him
they admitted his gratitude as fully established, and needed no fresh
proofs to be convinced of his valiant spirit, as those related in the
history of his exploits were sufficient, still Don Quixote persisted in
his resolve; and mounted on Rocinante, bracing his buckler on his arm
and grasping his lance, he posted himself in the middle of a high road
that was not far from the green meadow. Sancho followed on Dapple,
together with all the members of the pastoral gathering, eager to see
what would be the upshot of his vainglorious and extraordinary
proposal.

Don Quixote, then, having, as has been said, planted himself in the
middle of the road, made the welkin ring with words to this effect: “Ho
ye travellers and wayfarers, knights, squires, folk on foot or on
horseback, who pass this way or shall pass in the course of the next
two days! Know that Don Quixote of La Mancha, knight-errant, is posted
here to maintain by arms that the beauty and courtesy enshrined in the
nymphs that dwell in these meadows and groves surpass all upon earth,
putting aside the lady of my heart, Dulcinea del Toboso. Wherefore, let
him who is of the opposite opinion come on, for here I await him.”

Twice he repeated the same words, and twice they fell unheard by any
adventurer; but fate, that was guiding affairs for him from better to
better, so ordered it that shortly afterwards there appeared on the
road a crowd of men on horseback, many of them with lances in their
hands, all riding in a compact body and in great haste. No sooner had
those who were with Don Quixote seen them than they turned about and
withdrew to some distance from the road, for they knew that if they
stayed some harm might come to them; but Don Quixote with intrepid
heart stood his ground, and Sancho Panza shielded himself with
Rocinante’s hind-quarters. The troop of lancers came up, and one of
them who was in advance began shouting to Don Quixote, “Get out of the
way, you son of the devil, or these bulls will knock