Size



To which Don Quixote returned, “Do me the favour, señora, to let a lute
be placed in my chamber to-night; and I will comfort this poor maiden
to the best of my power; for in the early stages of love a prompt
disillusion is an approved remedy;” and with this he retired, so as not
to be remarked by any who might see him there.

He had scarcely withdrawn when Altisidora, recovering from her swoon,
said to her companion, “The lute must be left, for no doubt Don Quixote
intends to give us some music; and being his it will not be bad.”

They went at once to inform the duchess of what was going on, and of
the lute Don Quixote asked for, and she, delighted beyond measure,
plotted with the duke and her two damsels to play him a trick that
should be amusing but harmless; and in high glee they waited for night,
which came quickly as the day had come; and as for the day, the duke
and duchess spent it in charming conversation with Don Quixote.

When eleven o’clock came, Don Quixote found a guitar in his chamber; he
tried it, opened the window, and perceived that some persons were
walking in the garden; and having passed his fingers over the frets of
the guitar and tuned it as well as he could, he spat and cleared his
chest, and then with a voice a little hoarse but full-toned, he sang
the following ballad, which he had himself that day composed:

Mighty Love the hearts of maidens
Doth unsettle and perplex,
And the instrument he uses
Most of all is idleness.

Sewing, stitching, any labour,
Having always work to do,
To the poison Love instilleth
Is the antidote most sure.

And to proper-minded maidens
Who desire the matron’s name
Modesty’s a marriage portion,
Modesty their highest praise.

Men of prudence and discretion,
Courtiers gay and gallant knights,
With the wanton damsels dally,
But the modest take to wife.
There are passions, transient, fleeting,
Loves in hostelries declar’d,
Sunrise loves, with sunset ended,
When the guest hath gone his way.

Love that springs up swift and sudden,
Here to-day, to-morrow flown,
Passes, leaves no trace behind it,
Leaves no image on the soul.

Painting that is laid on painting
Maketh no display or show;
Where one beauty’s in possession
There no other can take hold.

Dulcinea del Toboso
Painted on my heart I wear;
Never from its tablets, never,
Can her image be eras’d.

The quality of all in lovers
Most esteemed is constancy;
’Tis by this that love works wonders,
This exalts them to the skies.


Don Quixote had got so far with his song, to which the duke, the
duchess, Altisidora, and nearly the whole household of the castle were
listening, when all of a sudden from a gallery above that was exactly
over his window they let down a cord with more than a hundred bells
attached to it, and immediately after that discharged a great sack full
of cats, which also had bells of smaller size tied to their tails. Such
was the din of the bells and the squalling of the cats, that though the
duke and duchess were the contrivers of the joke they were startled by
it, while Don Quixote stood paralysed with fear; and as luck would have
it, two or three of the cats made their way in through the grating of
his chamber, and flying from one side to the other, made it seem as if
there was a legion of devils at large in it. They extinguished the
candles that were burning in the room, and rushed about seeking some
way of escape; the cord with the large bells never ceased rising and
falling; and most of the people of the castle, not knowing what was
really the matter, were at their wits’ end with astonishment. Don
Quixote sprang to his feet, and drawing his sword, began making passes
at the grating, shouting out, “Avaunt, malignant enchanters! avaunt, ye
witchcraft-working rabble! I am Don Quixote of La Mancha, against whom
your evil machinations avail not nor have any power.” And turning upon
the cats that were running about the r