lsehood as oil above water; if not
_operibus credite, et non verbis_. Let one of you come with me, and he
will see with his eyes what he does not believe with his ears.”

“It’s for me to make that trip,” said Sanchica; “take me with you,
señor, behind you on your horse; for I’ll go with all my heart to see
my father.”

“Governors’ daughters,” said the page, “must not travel along the roads
alone, but accompanied by coaches and litters and a great number of
attendants.”

“By God,” said Sanchica, “I can go just as well mounted on a she-ass as
in a coach; what a dainty lass you must take me for!”

“Hush, girl,” said Teresa; “you don’t know what you’re talking about;
the gentleman is quite right, for ‘as the time so the behaviour;’ when
it was Sancho it was ‘Sancha;’ when it is governor it’s ‘señora;’ I
don’t know if I’m right.”

“Señora Teresa says more than she is aware of,” said the page; “and now
give me something to eat and let me go at once, for I mean to return
this evening.”

“Come and do penance with me,” said the curate at this; “for Señora
Teresa has more will than means to serve so worthy a guest.”

The page refused, but had to consent at last for his own sake; and the
curate took him home with him very gladly, in order to have an
opportunity of questioning him at leisure about Don Quixote and his
doings. The bachelor offered to write the letters in reply for Teresa;
but she did not care to let him mix himself up in her affairs, for she
thought him somewhat given to joking; and so she gave a cake and a
couple of eggs to a young acolyte who was a penman, and he wrote for
her two letters, one for her husband and the other for the duchess,
dictated out of her own head, which are not the worst inserted in this
great history, as will be seen farther on.



p50e.jpg (19K)



CHAPTER LI.
OF THE PROGRESS OF SANCHO’S GOVERNMENT, AND OTHER SUCH ENTERTAINING
MATTERS




p51a.jpg (188K)

Full Size



Day came after the night of the governor’s round; a night which the
head-carver passed without sleeping, so were his thoughts of the face
and air and beauty of the disguised damsel, while the majordomo spent
what was left of it in writing an account to his lord and lady of all
Sancho said and did, being as much amazed at his sayings as at his
doings, for there was a mixture of shrewdness and simplicity in all his
words and deeds. The señor governor got up, and by Doctor Pedro Recio’s
directions they made him break his fast on a little conserve and four
sups of cold water, which Sancho would have readily exchanged for a
piece of bread and a bunch of grapes; but seeing there was no help for
it, he submitted with no little sorrow of heart and discomfort of
stomach; Pedro Recio having persuaded him that light and delicate diet
enlivened the wits, and that was what was most essential for persons
placed in command and in responsible situations, where they have to
employ not only the bodily powers but those of the mind also.

By means of this sophistry Sancho was made to endure hunger, and hunger
so keen that in his heart he cursed the government, and even him who
had given it to him; however, with his hunger and his conserve he
undertook to deliver judgments that day, and the first thing that came
before him was a question that was submitted to him by a stranger, in
the presence of the majordomo and the other attendants, and it was in
these words: “Señor, a large river separated two districts of one and
the same lordship—will your worship please to pay attention, for the
case is an important and a rather knotty one? Well then, on this river
there was a bridge, and at one end of it a gallows, and a sort of
tribunal, where four judges commonly sat to administer the law which
the lord of river, bridge and the lordship had enacted, and which was
to this effect, ‘If anyone crosses by this bridge from one side to the
other he shall declare on oath where he is go