”

“I’ll bet,” replied Sancho, “that your worship thinks I have done
something I ought not with my person.”

“It makes it worse to stir it, friend Sancho,” returned Don Quixote.

With this and other talk of the same sort master and man passed the
night, till Sancho, perceiving that daybreak was coming on apace, very
cautiously untied Rocinante and tied up his breeches. As soon as
Rocinante found himself free, though by nature he was not at all
mettlesome, he seemed to feel lively and began pawing—for as to
capering, begging his pardon, he knew not what it meant. Don Quixote,
then, observing that Rocinante could move, took it as a good sign and a
signal that he should attempt the dread adventure. By this time day had
fully broken and everything showed distinctly, and Don Quixote saw that
he was among some tall trees, chestnuts, which cast a very deep shade;
he perceived likewise that the sound of the strokes did not cease, but
could not discover what caused it, and so without any further delay he
let Rocinante feel the spur, and once more taking leave of Sancho, he
told him to wait for him there three days at most, as he had said
before, and if he should not have returned by that time, he might feel
sure it had been God’s will that he should end his days in that
perilous adventure. He again repeated the message and commission with
which he was to go on his behalf to his lady Dulcinea, and said he was
not to be uneasy as to the payment of his services, for before leaving
home he had made his will, in which he would find himself fully
recompensed in the matter of wages in due proportion to the time he had
served; but if God delivered him safe, sound, and unhurt out of that
danger, he might look upon the promised island as much more than
certain. Sancho began to weep afresh on again hearing the affecting
words of his good master, and resolved to stay with him until the final
issue and end of the business. From these tears and this honourable
resolve of Sancho Panza’s the author of this history infers that he
must have been of good birth and at least an old Christian; and the
feeling he displayed touched his but not so much as to make him show
any weakness; on the contrary, hiding what he felt as well as he could,
he began to move towards that quarter whence the sound of the water and
of the strokes seemed to come.

Sancho followed him on foot, leading by the halter, as his custom was,
his ass, his constant comrade in prosperity or adversity; and advancing
some distance through the shady chestnut trees they came upon a little
meadow at the foot of some high rocks, down which a mighty rush of
water flung itself. At the foot of the rocks were some rudely
constructed houses looking more like ruins than houses, from among
which came, they perceived, the din and clatter of blows, which still
continued without intermission. Rocinante took fright at the noise of
the water and of the blows, but quieting him Don Quixote advanced step
by step towards the houses, commending himself with all his heart to
his lady, imploring her support in that dread pass and enterprise, and
on the way commending himself to God, too, not to forget him. Sancho
who never quitted his side, stretched his neck as far as he could and
peered between the legs of Rocinante to see if he could now discover
what it was that caused him such fear and apprehension. They went it
might be a hundred paces farther, when on turning a corner the true
cause, beyond the possibility of any mistake, of that dread-sounding
and to them awe-inspiring noise that had kept them all the night in
such fear and perplexity, appeared plain and obvious; and it was (if,
reader, thou art not disgusted and disappointed) six fulling hammers
which by their alternate strokes made all the din.

When Don Quixote perceived what it was, he was struck dumb and rigid
from head to foot. Sancho glanced at him and saw him with his head bent
down upo