tesy, and entrust the justice of my cause to the
might of his invincible arm.”

“Enough; no more praise,” said Don Quixote at this, “for I hate all
flattery; and though this may not be so, still language of the kind is
offensive to my chaste ears. I will only say, señora, that whether it
has might or not, that which it may or may not have shall be devoted to
your service even to death; and now, leaving this to its proper season,
I would ask the señor licentiate to tell me what it is that has brought
him into these parts, alone, unattended, and so lightly clad that I am
filled with amazement.”

“I will answer that briefly,” replied the curate; “you must know then,
Señor Don Quixote, that Master Nicholas, our friend and barber, and I
were going to Seville to receive some money that a relative of mine who
went to the Indies many years ago had sent me, and not such a small sum
but that it was over sixty thousand pieces of eight, full weight, which
is something; and passing by this place yesterday we were attacked by
four footpads, who stripped us even to our beards, and them they
stripped off so that the barber found it necessary to put on a false
one, and even this young man here”—pointing to Cardenio—“they
completely transformed. But the best of it is, the story goes in the
neighbourhood that those who attacked us belong to a number of galley
slaves who, they say, were set free almost on the very same spot by a
man of such valour that, in spite of the commissary and of the guards,
he released the whole of them; and beyond all doubt he must have been
out of his senses, or he must be as great a scoundrel as they, or some
man without heart or conscience to let the wolf loose among the sheep,
the fox among the hens, the fly among the honey. He has defrauded
justice, and opposed his king and lawful master, for he opposed his
just commands; he has, I say, robbed the galleys of their feet, stirred
up the Holy Brotherhood which for many years past has been quiet, and,
lastly, has done a deed by which his soul may be lost without any gain
to his body.” Sancho had told the curate and the barber of the
adventure of the galley slaves, which, so much to his glory, his master
had achieved, and hence the curate in alluding to it made the most of
it to see what would be said or done by Don Quixote; who changed colour
at every word, not daring to say that it was he who had been the
liberator of those worthy people. “These, then,” said the curate, “were
they who robbed us; and God in his mercy pardon him who would not let
them go to the punishment they deserved.”



c29f.jpg (53K)

Full Size



CHAPTER XXX.
WHICH TREATS OF ADDRESS DISPLAYED BY THE FAIR DOROTHEA, WITH OTHER
MATTERS PLEASANT AND AMUSING




c30a.jpg (147K)

Full Size




The curate had hardly ceased speaking, when Sancho said, “In faith,
then, señor licentiate, he who did that deed was my master; and it was
not for want of my telling him beforehand and warning him to mind what
he was about, and that it was a sin to set them at liberty, as they
were all on the march there because they were special scoundrels.”

“Blockhead!” said Don Quixote at this, “it is no business or concern of
knights-errant to inquire whether any persons in affliction, in chains,
or oppressed that they may meet on the high roads go that way and
suffer as they do because of their faults or because of their
misfortunes. It only concerns them to aid them as persons in need of
help, having regard to their sufferings and not to their rascalities. I
encountered a chaplet or string of miserable and unfortunate people,
and did for them what my sense of duty demands of me, and as for the
rest be that as it may; and whoever takes objection to it, saving the
sacred dignity of the señor licentiate and his honoured person, I say
he knows little about chivalry and lies like a whoreson villain, and
this I will give him to know to the fullest ext