
tusks, and scattering foam from his mouth. As soon as he saw him Don
Quixote, bracing his shield on his arm, and drawing his sword, advanced
to meet him; the duke with boar-spear did the same; but the duchess
would have gone in front of them all had not the duke prevented her.
Sancho alone, deserting Dapple at the sight of the mighty beast, took
to his heels as hard as he could and strove in vain to mount a tall
oak. As he was clinging to a branch, however, half-way up in his
struggle to reach the top, the bough, such was his ill-luck and hard
fate, gave way, and caught in his fall by a broken limb of the oak, he
hung suspended in the air unable to reach the ground. Finding himself
in this position, and that the green coat was beginning to tear, and
reflecting that if the fierce animal came that way he might be able to
get at him, he began to utter such cries, and call for help so
earnestly, that all who heard him and did not see him felt sure he must
be in the teeth of some wild beast. In the end the tusked boar fell
pierced by the blades of the many spears they held in front of him; and
Don Quixote, turning round at the cries of Sancho, for he knew by them
that it was he, saw him hanging from the oak head downwards, with
Dapple, who did not forsake him in his distress, close beside him; and
Cide Hamete observes that he seldom saw Sancho Panza without seeing
Dapple, or Dapple without seeing Sancho Panza; such was their
attachment and loyalty one to the other. Don Quixote went over and
unhooked Sancho, who, as soon as he found himself on the ground, looked
at the rent in his huntingcoat and was grieved to the heart, for he
thought he had got a patrimonial estate in that suit.

Meanwhile they had slung the mighty boar across the back of a mule, and
having covered it with sprigs of rosemary and branches of myrtle, they
bore it away as the spoils of victory to some large field-tents which
had been pitched in the middle of the wood, where they found the tables
laid and dinner served, in such grand and sumptuous style that it was
easy to see the rank and magnificence of those who had provided it.
Sancho, as he showed the rents in his torn suit to the duchess,
observed, “If we had been hunting hares, or after small birds, my coat
would have been safe from being in the plight it’s in; I don’t know
what pleasure one can find in lying in wait for an animal that may take
your life with his tusk if he gets at you. I recollect having heard an
old ballad sung that says,

By bears be thou devoured, as erst
Was famous Favila.”


“That,” said Don Quixote, “was a Gothic king, who, going a-hunting, was
devoured by a bear.”

“Just so,” said Sancho; “and I would not have kings and princes expose
themselves to such dangers for the sake of a pleasure which, to my
mind, ought not to be one, as it consists in killing an animal that has
done no harm whatever.”

“Quite the contrary, Sancho; you are wrong there,” said the duke; “for
hunting is more suitable and requisite for kings and princes than for
anybody else. The chase is the emblem of war; it has stratagems, wiles,
and crafty devices for overcoming the enemy in safety; in it extreme
cold and intolerable heat have to be borne, indolence and sleep are
despised, the bodily powers are invigorated, the limbs of him who
engages in it are made supple, and, in a word, it is a pursuit which
may be followed without injury to anyone and with enjoyment to many;
and the best of it is, it is not for everybody, as field-sports of
other sorts are, except hawking, which also is only for kings and great
lords. Reconsider your opinion therefore, Sancho, and when you are
governor take to hunting, and you will find the good of it.”

“Nay,” said Sancho, “the good governor should have a broken leg and
keep at home;” it would be a nice thing if, after people had been at
the trouble of coming to look for him on business, the governor were to
be away in 