upon a tall mule
of easy pace and handsomely caparisoned. They put the surcoat on him,
and on the back, without his perceiving it, they stitched a parchment
on which they wrote in large letters, “This is Don Quixote of La
Mancha.” As they set out upon their excursion the placard attracted the
eyes of all who chanced to see him, and as they read out, “This is Don
Quixote of La Mancha,” Don Quixote was amazed to see how many people
gazed at him, called him by his name, and recognised him, and turning
to Don Antonio, who rode at his side, he observed to him, “Great are
the privileges knight-errantry involves, for it makes him who professes
it known and famous in every region of the earth; see, Don Antonio,
even the very boys of this city know me without ever having seen me.”

“True, Señor Don Quixote,” returned Don Antonio; “for as fire cannot be
hidden or kept secret, virtue cannot escape being recognised; and that
which is attained by the profession of arms shines distinguished above
all others.”

It came to pass, however, that as Don Quixote was proceeding amid the
acclamations that have been described, a Castilian, reading the
inscription on his back, cried out in a loud voice, “The devil take
thee for a Don Quixote of La Mancha! What! art thou here, and not dead
of the countless drubbings that have fallen on thy ribs? Thou art mad;
and if thou wert so by thyself, and kept thyself within thy madness, it
would not be so bad; but thou hast the gift of making fools and
blockheads of all who have anything to do with thee or say to thee.
Why, look at these gentlemen bearing thee company! Get thee home,
blockhead, and see after thy affairs, and thy wife and children, and
give over these fooleries that are sapping thy brains and skimming away
thy wits.”

“Go your own way, brother,” said Don Antonio, “and don’t offer advice
to those who don’t ask you for it. Señor Don Quixote is in his full
senses, and we who bear him company are not fools; virtue is to be
honoured wherever it may be found; go, and bad luck to you, and don’t
meddle where you are not wanted.”

“By God, your worship is right,” replied the Castilian; “for to advise
this good man is to kick against the pricks; still for all that it
fills me with pity that the sound wit they say the blockhead has in
everything should dribble away by the channel of his knight-errantry;
but may the bad luck your worship talks of follow me and all my
descendants, if, from this day forth, though I should live longer than
Methuselah, I ever give advice to anybody even if he asks me for it.”

The advice-giver took himself off, and they continued their stroll; but
so great was the press of the boys and people to read the placard, that
Don Antonio was forced to remove it as if he were taking off something
else.



p62b.jpg (373K)

Full Size



Night came and they went home, and there was a ladies’ dancing party,
for Don Antonio’s wife, a lady of rank and gaiety, beauty and wit, had
invited some friends of hers to come and do honour to her guest and
amuse themselves with his strange delusions. Several of them came, they
supped sumptuously, the dance began at about ten o’clock. Among the
ladies were two of a mischievous and frolicsome turn, and, though
perfectly modest, somewhat free in playing tricks for harmless
diversion’s sake. These two were so indefatigable in taking Don Quixote
out to dance that they tired him down, not only in body but in spirit.
It was a sight to see the figure Don Quixote made, long, lank, lean,
and yellow, his garments clinging tight to him, ungainly, and above all
anything but agile.



p62c.jpg (342K)

Full Size



The gay ladies made secret love to him, and he on his part secretly
repelled them, but finding himself hard pressed by their blandishments
he lifted up his voice and exclaimed, “_Fugite, partes adversæ!_ Leave
me in peace, unwelcome overtures; avaunt, with your desires, ladies,