 between the great Trapobana and the
Southern Sea, two leagues beyond Cape Comorin. She was the widow of
King Archipiela, her lord and husband, and of their marriage they had
issue the Princess Antonomasia, heiress of the kingdom; which Princess
Antonomasia was reared and brought up under my care and direction, I
being the oldest and highest in rank of her mother’s duennas. Time
passed, and the young Antonomasia reached the age of fourteen, and such
a perfection of beauty, that nature could not raise it higher. Then, it
must not be supposed her intelligence was childish; she was as
intelligent as she was fair, and she was fairer than all the world; and
is so still, unless the envious fates and hard-hearted sisters three
have cut for her the thread of life. But that they have not, for Heaven
will not suffer so great a wrong to Earth, as it would be to pluck
unripe the grapes of the fairest vineyard on its surface. Of this
beauty, to which my poor feeble tongue has failed to do justice,
countless princes, not only of that country, but of others, were
enamoured, and among them a private gentleman, who was at the court,
dared to raise his thoughts to the heaven of so great beauty, trusting
to his youth, his gallant bearing, his numerous accomplishments and
graces, and his quickness and readiness of wit; for I may tell your
highnesses, if I am not wearying you, that he played the guitar so as
to make it speak, and he was, besides, a poet and a great dancer, and
he could make birdcages so well, that by making them alone he might
have gained a livelihood, had he found himself reduced to utter
poverty; and gifts and graces of this kind are enough to bring down a
mountain, not to say a tender young girl. But all his gallantry, wit,
and gaiety, all his graces and accomplishments, would have been of
little or no avail towards gaining the fortress of my pupil, had not
the impudent thief taken the precaution of gaining me over first.
First, the villain and heartless vagabond sought to win my good-will
and purchase my compliance, so as to get me, like a treacherous warder,
to deliver up to him the keys of the fortress I had in charge. In a
word, he gained an influence over my mind, and overcame my resolutions
with I know not what trinkets and jewels he gave me; but it was some
verses I heard him singing one night from a grating that opened on the
street where he lived, that, more than anything else, made me give way
and led to my fall; and if I remember rightly they ran thus:

From that sweet enemy of mine
    My bleeding heart hath had its wound;
    And to increase the pain I’m bound
To suffer and to make no sign.


The lines seemed pearls to me and his voice sweet as syrup; and
afterwards, I may say ever since then, looking at the misfortune into
which I have fallen, I have thought that poets, as Plato advised, ought
to be banished from all well-ordered States; at least the amatory ones,
for they write verses, not like those of ‘The Marquis of Mantua,’ that
delight and draw tears from the women and children, but sharp-pointed
conceits that pierce the heart like soft thorns, and like the lightning
strike it, leaving the raiment uninjured. Another time he sang:

Come Death, so subtly veiled that I
    Thy coming know not, how or when,
    Lest it should give me life again
To find how sweet it is to die.


—and other verses and burdens of the same sort, such as enchant when
sung and fascinate when written. And then, when they condescend to
compose a sort of verse that was at that time in vogue in Kandy, which
they call seguidillas! Then it is that hearts leap and laughter breaks
forth, and the body grows restless and all the senses turn quicksilver.
And so I say, sirs, that these troubadours richly deserve to be
banished to the isles of the lizards. Though it is not they that are in
fault, but the simpletons that extol them, and the fools that believe
in them; and had I been