use, either
I know little, or this castle is enchanted, for thou must know—but this
that I am now about to tell thee thou must swear to keep secret until
after my death.”

“I swear it,” answered Sancho.

“I say so,” continued Don Quixote, “because I hate taking away anyone’s
good name.”

“I say,” replied Sancho, “that I swear to hold my tongue about it till
the end of your worship’s days, and God grant I may be able to let it
out to-morrow.”

“Do I do thee such injuries, Sancho,” said Don Quixote, “that thou
wouldst see me dead so soon?”

“It is not for that,” replied Sancho, “but because I hate keeping
things long, and I don’t want them to grow rotten with me from
over-keeping.”

“At any rate,” said Don Quixote, “I have more confidence in thy
affection and good nature; and so I would have thee know that this
night there befell me one of the strangest adventures that I could
describe, and to relate it to thee briefly thou must know that a little
while ago the daughter of the lord of this castle came to me, and that
she is the most elegant and beautiful damsel that could be found in the
wide world. What I could tell thee of the charms of her person! of her
lively wit! of other secret matters which, to preserve the fealty I owe
to my lady Dulcinea del Toboso, I shall pass over unnoticed and in
silence! I will only tell thee that, either fate being envious of so
great a boon placed in my hands by good fortune, or perhaps (and this
is more probable) this castle being, as I have already said, enchanted,
at the time when I was engaged in the sweetest and most amorous
discourse with her, there came, without my seeing or knowing whence it
came, a hand attached to some arm of some huge giant, that planted such
a cuff on my jaws that I have them all bathed in blood, and then
pummelled me in such a way that I am in a worse plight than yesterday
when the carriers, on account of Rocinante’s misbehaviour, inflicted on
us the injury thou knowest of; whence conjecture that there must be
some enchanted Moor guarding the treasure of this damsel’s beauty, and
that it is not for me.”

“Not for me either,” said Sancho, “for more than four hundred Moors
have so thrashed me that the drubbing of the stakes was cakes and
fancy-bread to it. But tell me, señor, what do you call this excellent
and rare adventure that has left us as we are left now? Though your
worship was not so badly off, having in your arms that incomparable
beauty you spoke of; but I, what did I have, except the heaviest whacks
I think I had in all my life? Unlucky me and the mother that bore me!
for I am not a knight-errant and never expect to be one, and of all the
mishaps, the greater part falls to my share.”

“Then thou hast been thrashed too?” said Don Quixote.

“Didn’t I say so? worse luck to my line!” said Sancho.

“Be not distressed, friend,” said Don Quixote, “for I will now make the
precious balsam with which we shall cure ourselves in the twinkling of
an eye.”

By this time the cuadrillero had succeeded in lighting the lamp, and
came in to see the man that he thought had been killed; and as Sancho
caught sight of him at the door, seeing him coming in his shirt, with a
cloth on his head, and a lamp in his hand, and a very forbidding
countenance, he said to his master, “Señor, can it be that this is the
enchanted Moor coming back to give us more castigation if there be
anything still left in the ink-bottle?”

“It cannot be the Moor,” answered Don Quixote, “for those under
enchantment do not let themselves be seen by anyone.”

“If they don’t let themselves be seen, they let themselves be felt,”
said Sancho; “if not, let my shoulders speak to the point.”

“Mine could speak too,” said Don Quixote, “but that is not a sufficient
reason for believing that what we see is the enchanted Moor.”

The officer came up, and finding them engaged in such a peaceful
conversation, stood amazed; though Don Quixote, t