s, very amusing, but not entitled to much
consideration or care. All the editions printed in Spain from 1637 to
1771, when the famous printer Ibarra took it up, were mere trade
editions, badly and carelessly printed on vile paper and got up in the
style of chap-books intended only for popular use, with, in most
instances, uncouth illustrations and clap-trap additions by the
publisher.

To England belongs the credit of having been the first country to
recognise the right of “Don Quixote” to better treatment than this. The
London edition of 1738, commonly called Lord Carteret’s from having
been suggested by him, was not a mere _édition de luxe_. It produced
“Don Quixote” in becoming form as regards paper and type, and
embellished with plates which, if not particularly happy as
illustrations, were at least well intentioned and well executed, but it
also aimed at correctness of text, a matter to which nobody except the
editors of the Valencia and Brussels editions had given even a passing
thought; and for a first attempt it was fairly successful, for though
some of its emendations are inadmissible, a good many of them have been
adopted by all subsequent editors.

The zeal of publishers, editors, and annotators brought about a
remarkable change of sentiment with regard to “Don Quixote.” A vast
number of its admirers began to grow ashamed of laughing over it. It
became almost a crime to treat it as a humorous book. The humour was
not entirely denied, but, according to the new view, it was rated as an
altogether secondary quality, a mere accessory, nothing more than the
stalking-horse under the presentation of which Cervantes shot his
philosophy or his satire, or whatever it was he meant to shoot; for on
this point opinions varied. All were agreed, however, that the object
he aimed at was not the books of chivalry. He said emphatically in the
preface to the First Part and in the last sentence of the Second, that
he had no other object in view than to discredit these books, and this,
to advanced criticism, made it clear that his object must have been
something else.

One theory was that the book was a kind of allegory, setting forth the
eternal struggle between the ideal and the real, between the spirit of
poetry and the spirit of prose; and perhaps German philosophy never
evolved a more ungainly or unlikely camel out of the depths of its
inner consciousness. Something of the antagonism, no doubt, is to be
found in “Don Quixote,” because it is to be found everywhere in life,
and Cervantes drew from life. It is difficult to imagine a community in
which the never-ceasing game of cross-purposes between Sancho Panza and
Don Quixote would not be recognised as true to nature. In the stone
age, among the lake dwellers, among the cave men, there were Don
Quixotes and Sancho Panzas; there must have been the troglodyte who
never could see the facts before his eyes, and the troglodyte who could
see nothing else. But to suppose Cervantes deliberately setting himself
to expound any such idea in two stout quarto volumes is to suppose
something not only very unlike the age in which he lived, but
altogether unlike Cervantes himself, who would have been the first to
laugh at an attempt of the sort made by anyone else.

The extraordinary influence of the romances of chivalry in his day is
quite enough to account for the genesis of the book. Some idea of the
prodigious development of this branch of literature in the sixteenth
century may be obtained from the scrutiny of Chapter VII, if the reader
bears in mind that only a portion of the romances belonging to by far
the largest group are enumerated. As to its effect upon the nation,
there is abundant evidence. From the time when the Amadises and
Palmerins began to grow popular down to the very end of the century,
there is a steady stream of invective, from men whose character and
position lend weight to their words, against the romances of ch