n wise, virtuous, and thoughtful
subjects, they honour, value, exalt them, and even crown them with the
leaves of that tree which the thunderbolt strikes not, as if to show
that they whose brows are honoured and adorned with such a crown are
not to be assailed by anyone.”

He of the green gaban was filled with astonishment at Don Quixote’s
argument, so much so that he began to abandon the notion he had taken
up about his being crazy. But in the middle of the discourse, it being
not very much to his taste, Sancho had turned aside out of the road to
beg a little milk from some shepherds, who were milking their ewes hard
by; and just as the gentleman, highly pleased, was about to renew the
conversation, Don Quixote, raising his head, perceived a cart covered
with royal flags coming along the road they were travelling; and
persuaded that this must be some new adventure, he called aloud to
Sancho to come and bring him his helmet. Sancho, hearing himself
called, quitted the shepherds, and, prodding Dapple vigorously, came up
to his master, to whom there fell a terrific and desperate adventure.



p16e.jpg (49K)



CHAPTER XVII.
WHEREIN IS SHOWN THE FURTHEST AND HIGHEST POINT WHICH THE UNEXAMPLED
COURAGE OF DON QUIXOTE REACHED OR COULD REACH; TOGETHER WITH THE
HAPPILY ACHIEVED ADVENTURE OF THE LIONS




p17a.jpg (137K)

Full Size



The history tells that when Don Quixote called out to Sancho to bring
him his helmet, Sancho was buying some curds the shepherds agreed to
sell him, and flurried by the great haste his master was in did not
know what to do with them or what to carry them in; so, not to lose
them, for he had already paid for them, he thought it best to throw
them into his master’s helmet, and acting on this bright idea he went
to see what his master wanted with him. He, as he approached, exclaimed
to him:

“Give me that helmet, my friend, for either I know little of
adventures, or what I observe yonder is one that will, and does, call
upon me to arm myself.”

He of the green gaban, on hearing this, looked in all directions, but
could perceive nothing, except a cart coming towards them with two or
three small flags, which led him to conclude it must be carrying
treasure of the King’s, and he said so to Don Quixote. He, however,
would not believe him, being always persuaded and convinced that all
that happened to him must be adventures and still more adventures; so
he replied to the gentleman, “He who is prepared has his battle half
fought; nothing is lost by my preparing myself, for I know by
experience that I have enemies, visible and invisible, and I know not
when, or where, or at what moment, or in what shapes they will attack
me;” and turning to Sancho, he called for his helmet; and Sancho, as he
had no time to take out the curds, had to give it just as it was. Don
Quixote took it, and without perceiving what was in it thrust it down
in hot haste upon his head; but as the curds were pressed and squeezed
the whey began to run all over his face and beard, whereat he was so
startled that he cried out to Sancho:

“Sancho, what’s this? I think my head is softening, or my brains are
melting, or I am sweating from head to foot! If I am sweating it is not
indeed from fear. I am convinced beyond a doubt that the adventure
which is about to befall me is a terrible one. Give me something to
wipe myself with, if thou hast it, for this profuse sweat is blinding
me.”

Sancho held his tongue, and gave him a cloth, and gave thanks to God at
the same time that his master had not found out what was the matter.
Don Quixote then wiped himself, and took off his helmet to see what it
was that made his head feel so cool, and seeing all that white mash
inside his helmet he put it to his nose, and as soon as he had smelt it
he exclaimed:

“By the life of my lady Dulcinea del Toboso, but it is curds thou hast
put here, thou treacherous, impudent, ill-mannered squ