by where the
seven goats are, and by God and upon my soul, as in my youth I was a
goatherd in my own country, as soon as I saw them I felt a longing to
be among them for a little, and if I had not given way to it I think
I’d have burst. So I come and take, and what do I do? without saying
anything to anybody, not even to my master, softly and quietly I got
down from Clavileño and amused myself with the goats—which are like
violets, like flowers—for nigh three-quarters of an hour; and Clavileño
never stirred or moved from one spot.”

“And while the good Sancho was amusing himself with the goats,” said
the duke, “how did Señor Don Quixote amuse himself?”

To which Don Quixote replied, “As all these things and such like
occurrences are out of the ordinary course of nature, it is no wonder
that Sancho says what he does; for my own part I can only say that I
did not uncover my eyes either above or below, nor did I see sky or
earth or sea or shore. It is true I felt that I was passing through the
region of the air, and even that I touched that of fire; but that we
passed farther I cannot believe; for the region of fire being between
the heaven of the moon and the last region of the air, we could not
have reached that heaven where the seven goats Sancho speaks of are
without being burned; and as we were not burned, either Sancho is lying
or Sancho is dreaming.”

“I am neither lying nor dreaming,” said Sancho; “only ask me the tokens
of those same goats, and you’ll see by that whether I’m telling the
truth or not.”

“Tell us them then, Sancho,” said the duchess.

“Two of them,” said Sancho, “are green, two blood-red, two blue, and
one a mixture of all colours.”

“An odd sort of goat, that,” said the duke; “in this earthly region of
ours we have no such colours; I mean goats of such colours.”

“That’s very plain,” said Sancho; “of course there must be a difference
between the goats of heaven and the goats of the earth.”

“Tell me, Sancho,” said the duke, “did you see any he-goat among those
goats?”

“No, señor,” said Sancho; “but I have heard say that none ever passed
the horns of the moon.”

They did not care to ask him anything more about his journey, for they
saw he was in the vein to go rambling all over the heavens giving an
account of everything that went on there, without having ever stirred
from the garden. Such, in short, was the end of the adventure of the
Distressed Duenna, which gave the duke and duchess laughing matter not
only for the time being, but for all their lives, and Sancho something
to talk about for ages, if he lived so long; but Don Quixote, coming
close to his ear, said to him, “Sancho, as you would have us believe
what you saw in heaven, I require you to believe me as to what I saw in
the cave of Montesinos; I say no more.”



p41e.jpg (38K)



CHAPTER XLII.
OF THE COUNSELS WHICH DON QUIXOTE GAVE SANCHO PANZA BEFORE HE SET OUT
TO GOVERN THE ISLAND, TOGETHER WITH OTHER WELL-CONSIDERED MATTERS




p42a.jpg (120K)

Full Size



The duke and duchess were so well pleased with the successful and droll
result of the adventure of the Distressed One, that they resolved to
carry on the joke, seeing what a fit subject they had to deal with for
making it all pass for reality. So having laid their plans and given
instructions to their servants and vassals how to behave to Sancho in
his government of the promised island, the next day, that following
Clavileño’s flight, the duke told Sancho to prepare and get ready to go
and be governor, for his islanders were already looking out for him as
for the showers of May.

Sancho made him an obeisance, and said, “Ever since I came down from
heaven, and from the top of it beheld the earth, and saw how little it
is, the great desire I had to be a governor has been partly cooled in
me; for what is there grand in being ruler on a grain of mustard seed,
or what dignity or authority in governing hal