armed vessel in
which he and about sixty of the leading captives were to make their
escape; but just as they were about to put it into execution one Doctor
Juan Blanco de Paz, an ecclesiastic and a compatriot, informed the Dey
of the plot. Cervantes by force of character, by his self-devotion, by
his untiring energy and his exertions to lighten the lot of his
companions in misery, had endeared himself to all, and become the
leading spirit in the captive colony, and, incredible as it may seem,
jealousy of his influence and the esteem in which he was held, moved
this man to compass his destruction by a cruel death. The merchants
finding that the Dey knew all, and fearing that Cervantes under torture
might make disclosures that would imperil their own lives, tried to
persuade him to slip away on board a vessel that was on the point of
sailing for Spain; but he told them they had nothing to fear, for no
tortures would make him compromise anybody, and he went at once and
gave himself up to the Dey.

As before, the Dey tried to force him to name his accomplices.
Everything was made ready for his immediate execution; the halter was
put round his neck and his hands tied behind him, but all that could be
got from him was that he himself, with the help of four gentlemen who
had since left Algiers, had arranged the whole, and that the sixty who
were to accompany him were not to know anything of it until the last
moment. Finding he could make nothing of him, the Dey sent him back to
prison more heavily ironed than before.

The poverty-stricken Cervantes family had been all this time trying
once more to raise the ransom money, and at last a sum of three hundred
ducats was got together and entrusted to the Redemptorist Father Juan
Gil, who was about to sail for Algiers. The Dey, however, demanded more
than double the sum offered, and as his term of office had expired and
he was about to sail for Constantinople, taking all his slaves with
him, the case of Cervantes was critical. He was already on board
heavily ironed, when the Dey at length agreed to reduce his demand by
one-half, and Father Gil by borrowing was able to make up the amount,
and on September 19, 1580, after a captivity of five years all but a
week, Cervantes was at last set free. Before long he discovered that
Blanco de Paz, who claimed to be an officer of the Inquisition, was now
concocting on false evidence a charge of misconduct to be brought
against him on his return to Spain. To checkmate him Cervantes drew up
a series of twenty-five questions, covering the whole period of his
captivity, upon which he requested Father Gil to take the depositions
of credible witnesses before a notary. Eleven witnesses taken from
among the principal captives in Algiers deposed to all the facts above
stated and to a great deal more besides. There is something touching in
the admiration, love, and gratitude we see struggling to find
expression in the formal language of the notary, as they testify one
after another to the good deeds of Cervantes, how he comforted and
helped the weak-hearted, how he kept up their drooping courage, how he
shared his poor purse with this deponent, and how “in him this deponent
found father and mother.”

On his return to Spain he found his old regiment about to march for
Portugal to support Philip’s claim to the crown, and utterly penniless
now, had no choice but to rejoin it. He was in the expeditions to the
Azores in 1582 and the following year, and on the conclusion of the war
returned to Spain in the autumn of 1583, bringing with him the
manuscript of his pastoral romance, the “Galatea,” and probably also,
to judge by internal evidence, that of the first portion of “Persiles
and Sigismunda.” He also brought back with him, his biographers assert,
an infant daughter, the offspring of an amour, as some of them with
great circumstantiality inform us, with a Lisbon lady of noble birth,
whose name, howeve