contentment as many happy years
with her Cardenio, as on my knees I pray Heaven to allow me to live
with my Dorothea;” and with these words he once more embraced her and
pressed his face to hers with so much tenderness that he had to take
great heed to keep his tears from completing the proof of his love and
repentance in the sight of all. Not so Luscinda, and Cardenio, and
almost all the others, for they shed so many tears, some in their own
happiness, some at that of the others, that one would have supposed a
heavy calamity had fallen upon them all. Even Sancho Panza was weeping;
though afterwards he said he only wept because he saw that Dorothea was
not as he fancied the queen Micomicona, of whom he expected such great
favours. Their wonder as well as their weeping lasted some time, and
then Cardenio and Luscinda went and fell on their knees before Don
Fernando, returning him thanks for the favour he had rendered them in
language so grateful that he knew not how to answer them, and raising
them up embraced them with every mark of affection and courtesy.

He then asked Dorothea how she had managed to reach a place so far
removed from her own home, and she in a few fitting words told all that
she had previously related to Cardenio, with which Don Fernando and his
companions were so delighted that they wished the story had been
longer; so charmingly did Dorothea describe her misadventures. When she
had finished Don Fernando recounted what had befallen him in the city
after he had found in Luscinda’s bosom the paper in which she declared
that she was Cardenio’s wife, and never could be his. He said he meant
to kill her, and would have done so had he not been prevented by her
parents, and that he quitted the house full of rage and shame, and
resolved to avenge himself when a more convenient opportunity should
offer. The next day he learned that Luscinda had disappeared from her
father’s house, and that no one could tell whither she had gone.
Finally, at the end of some months he ascertained that she was in a
convent and meant to remain there all the rest of her life, if she were
not to share it with Cardenio; and as soon as he had learned this,
taking these three gentlemen as his companions, he arrived at the place
where she was, but avoided speaking to her, fearing that if it were
known he was there stricter precautions would be taken in the convent;
and watching a time when the porter’s lodge was open he left two to
guard the gate, and he and the other entered the convent in quest of
Luscinda, whom they found in the cloisters in conversation with one of
the nuns, and carrying her off without giving her time to resist, they
reached a place with her where they provided themselves with what they
required for taking her away; all which they were able to do in
complete safety, as the convent was in the country at a considerable
distance from the city. He added that when Luscinda found herself in
his power she lost all consciousness, and after returning to herself
did nothing but weep and sigh without speaking a word; and thus in
silence and tears they reached that inn, which for him was reaching
heaven where all the mischances of earth are over and at an end.



c36b.jpg (319K)

Full Size



c36e.jpg (36K)



CHAPTER XXXVII.
IN WHICH IS CONTINUED THE STORY OF THE FAMOUS PRINCESS MICOMICONA, WITH
OTHER DROLL ADVENTURES




c37a.jpg (159K)

Full Size




To all this Sancho listened with no little sorrow at heart to see how
his hopes of dignity were fading away and vanishing in smoke, and how
the fair Princess Micomicona had turned into Dorothea, and the giant
into Don Fernando, while his master was sleeping tranquilly, totally
unconscious of all that had come to pass. Dorothea was unable to
persuade herself that her present happiness was not all a dream;
Cardenio was in a similar state of mind, and Luscinda’s thoughts ran in
the same direction. Don Fern