ventures we go seeking will in the end lead us into
such misadventures that we shall not know which is our right foot; and
that the best and wisest thing, according to my small wits, would be
for us to return home, now that it is harvest-time, and attend to our
business, and give over wandering from Zeca to Mecca and from pail to
bucket, as the saying is.”

“How little thou knowest about chivalry, Sancho,” replied Don Quixote;
“hold thy peace and have patience; the day will come when thou shalt
see with thine own eyes what an honourable thing it is to wander in the
pursuit of this calling; nay, tell me, what greater pleasure can there
be in the world, or what delight can equal that of winning a battle,
and triumphing over one’s enemy? None, beyond all doubt.”

“Very likely,” answered Sancho, “though I do not know it; all I know is
that since we have been knights-errant, or since your worship has been
one (for I have no right to reckon myself one of so honourable a
number) we have never won any battle except the one with the Biscayan,
and even out of that your worship came with half an ear and half a
helmet the less; and from that till now it has been all cudgellings and
more cudgellings, cuffs and more cuffs, I getting the blanketing over
and above, and falling in with enchanted persons on whom I cannot
avenge myself so as to know what the delight, as your worship calls it,
of conquering an enemy is like.”

“That is what vexes me, and what ought to vex thee, Sancho,” replied
Don Quixote; “but henceforward I will endeavour to have at hand some
sword made by such craft that no kind of enchantments can take effect
upon him who carries it, and it is even possible that fortune may
procure for me that which belonged to Amadis when he was called ‘The
Knight of the Burning Sword,’ which was one of the best swords that
ever knight in the world possessed, for, besides having the said
virtue, it cut like a razor, and there was no armour, however strong
and enchanted it might be, that could resist it.”

“Such is my luck,” said Sancho, “that even if that happened and your
worship found some such sword, it would, like the balsam, turn out
serviceable and good for dubbed knights only, and as for the squires,
they might sup sorrow.”

“Fear not that, Sancho,” said Don Quixote: “Heaven will deal better by
thee.”

Thus talking, Don Quixote and his squire were going along, when, on the
road they were following, Don Quixote perceived approaching them a
large and thick cloud of dust, on seeing which he turned to Sancho and
said:

“This is the day, Sancho, on which will be seen the boon my fortune is
reserving for me; this, I say, is the day on which as much as on any
other shall be displayed the might of my arm, and on which I shall do
deeds that shall remain written in the book of fame for all ages to
come. Seest thou that cloud of dust which rises yonder? Well, then, all
that is churned up by a vast army composed of various and countless
nations that comes marching there.”

“According to that there must be two,” said Sancho, “for on this
opposite side also there rises just such another cloud of dust.”

Don Quixote turned to look and found that it was true, and rejoicing
exceedingly, he concluded that they were two armies about to engage and
encounter in the midst of that broad plain; for at all times and
seasons his fancy was full of the battles, enchantments, adventures,
crazy feats, loves, and defiances that are recorded in the books of
chivalry, and everything he said, thought, or did had reference to such
things. Now the cloud of dust he had seen was raised by two great
droves of sheep coming along the same road in opposite directions,
which, because of the dust, did not become visible until they drew
near, but Don Quixote asserted so positively that they were armies that
Sancho was led to believe it and say, “Well, and what are we to do,
señor?”



c17b.jpg (339K)

F