he barber settled himself on his beast, Sancho being left to go on
foot, which made him feel anew the loss of his Dapple, finding the want
of him now. But he bore all with cheerfulness, being persuaded that his
master had now fairly started and was just on the point of becoming an
emperor; for he felt no doubt at all that he would marry this princess,
and be king of Micomicon at least. The only thing that troubled him was
the reflection that this kingdom was in the land of the blacks, and
that the people they would give him for vassals would be all black; but
for this he soon found a remedy in his fancy, and said he to himself,
“What is it to me if my vassals are blacks? What more have I to do than
make a cargo of them and carry them to Spain, where I can sell them and
get ready money for them, and with it buy some title or some office in
which to live at ease all the days of my life? Not unless you go to
sleep and haven’t the wit or skill to turn things to account and sell
three, six, or ten thousand vassals while you would be talking about
it! By God I will stir them up, big and little, or as best I can, and
let them be ever so black I’ll turn them into white or yellow. Come,
come, what a fool I am!” And so he jogged on, so occupied with his
thoughts and easy in his mind that he forgot all about the hardship of
travelling on foot.

Cardenio and the curate were watching all this from among some bushes,
not knowing how to join company with the others; but the curate, who
was very fertile in devices, soon hit upon a way of effecting their
purpose, and with a pair of scissors he had in a case he quickly cut
off Cardenio’s beard, and putting on him a grey jerkin of his own he
gave him a black cloak, leaving himself in his breeches and doublet,
while Cardenio’s appearance was so different from what it had been that
he would not have known himself had he seen himself in a mirror. Having
effected this, although the others had gone on ahead while they were
disguising themselves, they easily came out on the high road before
them, for the brambles and awkward places they encountered did not
allow those on horseback to go as fast as those on foot. They then
posted themselves on the level ground at the outlet of the Sierra, and
as soon as Don Quixote and his companions emerged from it the curate
began to examine him very deliberately, as though he were striving to
recognise him, and after having stared at him for some time he hastened
towards him with open arms exclaiming, “A happy meeting with the mirror
of chivalry, my worthy compatriot Don Quixote of La Mancha, the flower
and cream of high breeding, the protection and relief of the
distressed, the quintessence of knights-errant!” And so saying he
clasped in his arms the knee of Don Quixote’s left leg. He, astonished
at the stranger’s words and behaviour, looked at him attentively, and
at length recognised him, very much surprised to see him there, and
made great efforts to dismount. This, however, the curate would not
allow, on which Don Quixote said, “Permit me, señor licentiate, for it
is not fitting that I should be on horseback and so reverend a person
as your worship on foot.”

“On no account will I allow it,” said the curate; “your mightiness must
remain on horseback, for it is on horseback you achieve the greatest
deeds and adventures that have been beheld in our age; as for me, an
unworthy priest, it will serve me well enough to mount on the haunches
of one of the mules of these gentlefolk who accompany your worship, if
they have no objection, and I will fancy I am mounted on the steed
Pegasus, or on the zebra or charger that bore the famous Moor,
Muzaraque, who to this day lies enchanted in the great hill of Zulema,
a little distance from the great Complutum.”

“Nor even that will I consent to, señor licentiate,” answered Don
Quixote, “and I know it will be the good pleasure of my lady the
princess, out of love for 