Christians who were to row, but Ana Felix said
she could answer for him, and her father offered to go and pay the
ransom of the Christians if by any chance they should not be
forthcoming. This, then, being agreed upon, the viceroy landed, and Don
Antonio Moreno took the fair Morisco and her father home with him, the
viceroy charging him to give them the best reception and welcome in his
power, while on his own part he offered all that house contained for
their entertainment; so great was the good-will and kindliness the
beauty of Ana Felix had infused into his heart.



p63e.jpg (23K)



CHAPTER LXIV.
TREATING OF THE ADVENTURE WHICH GAVE DON QUIXOTE MORE UNHAPPINESS THAN
ALL THAT HAD HITHERTO BEFALLEN HIM




p64a.jpg (80K)

Full Size



The wife of Don Antonio Moreno, so the history says, was extremely
happy to see Ana Felix in her house. She welcomed her with great
kindness, charmed as well by her beauty as by her intelligence; for in
both respects the fair Morisco was richly endowed, and all the people
of the city flocked to see her as though they had been summoned by the
ringing of the bells.

Don Quixote told Don Antonio that the plan adopted for releasing Don
Gregorio was not a good one, for its risks were greater than its
advantages, and that it would be better to land himself with his arms
and horse in Barbary; for he would carry him off in spite of the whole
Moorish host, as Don Gaiferos carried off his wife Melisendra.

“Remember, your worship,” observed Sancho on hearing him say so, “Señor
Don Gaiferos carried off his wife from the mainland, and took her to
France by land; but in this case, if by chance we carry off Don
Gregorio, we have no way of bringing him to Spain, for there’s the sea
between.”

“There’s a remedy for everything except death,” said Don Quixote; “if
they bring the vessel close to the shore we shall be able to get on
board though all the world strive to prevent us.”

“Your worship hits it off mighty well and mighty easy,” said Sancho;
“but ‘it’s a long step from saying to doing;’ and I hold to the
renegade, for he seems to me an honest good-hearted fellow.”

Don Antonio then said that if the renegade did not prove successful,
the expedient of the great Don Quixote’s expedition to Barbary should
be adopted. Two days afterwards the renegade put to sea in a light
vessel of six oars a-side manned by a stout crew, and two days later
the galleys made sail eastward, the general having begged the viceroy
to let him know all about the release of Don Gregorio and about Ana
Felix, and the viceroy promised to do as he requested.

One morning as Don Quixote went out for a stroll along the beach,
arrayed in full armour (for, as he often said, that was “his only gear,
his only rest the fray,” and he never was without it for a moment), he
saw coming towards him a knight, also in full armour, with a shining
moon painted on his shield, who, on approaching sufficiently near to be
heard, said in a loud voice, addressing himself to Don Quixote,
“Illustrious knight, and never sufficiently extolled Don Quixote of La
Mancha, I am the Knight of the White Moon, whose unheard-of
achievements will perhaps have recalled him to thy memory. I come to do
battle with thee and prove the might of thy arm, to the end that I make
thee acknowledge and confess that my lady, let her be who she may, is
incomparably fairer than thy Dulcinea del Toboso. If thou dost
acknowledge this fairly and openly, thou shalt escape death and save me
the trouble of inflicting it upon thee; if thou fightest and I vanquish
thee, I demand no other satisfaction than that, laying aside arms and
abstaining from going in quest of adventures, thou withdraw and betake
thyself to thine own village for the space of a year, and live there
without putting hand to sword, in peace and quiet and beneficial
repose, the same being needful for the increase of thy substance and
the salvation