 fair lady whose tears and sad
aspect show plainly that ye are carrying her off against her will, and
that ye have committed some scandalous outrage against her; and I, who
was born into the world to redress all such like wrongs, will not
permit you to advance another step until you have restored to her the
liberty she pines for and deserves.”

From these words all the hearers concluded that he must be a madman,
and began to laugh heartily, and their laughter acted like gunpowder on
Don Quixote’s fury, for drawing his sword without another word he made
a rush at the stand. One of those who supported it, leaving the burden
to his comrades, advanced to meet him, flourishing a forked stick that
he had for propping up the stand when resting, and with this he caught
a mighty cut Don Quixote made at him that severed it in two; but with
the portion that remained in his hand he dealt such a thwack on the
shoulder of Don Quixote’s sword arm (which the buckler could not
protect against the clownish assault) that poor Don Quixote came to the
ground in a sad plight.

Sancho Panza, who was coming on close behind puffing and blowing,
seeing him fall, cried out to his assailant not to strike him again,
for he was a poor enchanted knight, who had never harmed anyone all the
days of his life; but what checked the clown was, not Sancho’s
shouting, but seeing that Don Quixote did not stir hand or foot; and
so, fancying he had killed him, he hastily hitched up his tunic under
his girdle and took to his heels across the country like a deer.

By this time all Don Quixote’s companions had come up to where he lay;
but the processionists seeing them come running, and with them the
officers of the Brotherhood with their crossbows, apprehended mischief,
and clustering round the image, raised their hoods, and grasped their
scourges, as the priests did their tapers, and awaited the attack,
resolved to defend themselves and even to take the offensive against
their assailants if they could. Fortune, however, arranged the matter
better than they expected, for all Sancho did was to fling himself on
his master’s body, raising over him the most doleful and laughable
lamentation that ever was heard, for he believed he was dead. The
curate was known to another curate who walked in the procession, and
their recognition of one another set at rest the apprehensions of both
parties; the first then told the other in two words who Don Quixote
was, and he and the whole troop of penitents went to see if the poor
gentleman was dead, and heard Sancho Panza saying, with tears in his
eyes, “Oh flower of chivalry, that with one blow of a stick hast ended
the course of thy well-spent life! Oh pride of thy race, honour and
glory of all La Mancha, nay, of all the world, that for want of thee
will be full of evil-doers, no longer in fear of punishment for their
misdeeds! Oh thou, generous above all the Alexanders, since for only
eight months of service thou hast given me the best island the sea
girds or surrounds! Humble with the proud, haughty with the humble,
encounterer of dangers, endurer of outrages, enamoured without reason,
imitator of the good, scourge of the wicked, enemy of the mean, in
short, knight-errant, which is all that can be said!”



c52c.jpg (325K)

Full Size




At the cries and moans of Sancho, Don Quixote came to himself, and the
first word he said was, “He who lives separated from you, sweetest
Dulcinea, has greater miseries to endure than these. Aid me, friend
Sancho, to mount the enchanted cart, for I am not in a condition to
press the saddle of Rocinante, as this shoulder is all knocked to
pieces.”

“That I will do with all my heart, señor,” said Sancho; “and let us
return to our village with these gentlemen, who seek your good, and
there we will prepare for making another sally, which may turn out more
profitable and creditable to us.”

“Thou art right, Sancho,” returned Don Quix