ld me of the rare abilities and subtle intellect you
possess, and, above all, that you are a great poet.”

“A poet, it may be,” replied Don Lorenzo, “but a great one, by no
means. It is true that I am somewhat given to poetry and to reading
good poets, but not so much so as to justify the title of ‘great’ which
my father gives me.”

“I do not dislike that modesty,” said Don Quixote; “for there is no
poet who is not conceited and does not think he is the best poet in the
world.”

“There is no rule without an exception,” said Don Lorenzo; “there may
be some who are poets and yet do not think they are.”

“Very few,” said Don Quixote; “but tell me, what verses are those which
you have now in hand, and which your father tells me keep you somewhat
restless and absorbed? If it be some gloss, I know something about
glosses, and I should like to hear them; and if they are for a poetical
tournament, contrive to carry off the second prize; for the first
always goes by favour or personal standing, the second by simple
justice; and so the third comes to be the second, and the first,
reckoning in this way, will be third, in the same way as licentiate
degrees are conferred at the universities; but, for all that, the title
of first is a great distinction.”

“So far,” said Don Lorenzo to himself, “I should not take you to be a
madman; but let us go on.” So he said to him, “Your worship has
apparently attended the schools; what sciences have you studied?”

“That of knight-errantry,” said Don Quixote, “which is as good as that
of poetry, and even a finger or two above it.”

“I do not know what science that is,” said Don Lorenzo, “and until now
I have never heard of it.”

“It is a science,” said Don Quixote, “that comprehends in itself all or
most of the sciences in the world, for he who professes it must be a
jurist, and must know the rules of justice, distributive and equitable,
so as to give to each one what belongs to him and is due to him. He
must be a theologian, so as to be able to give a clear and distinctive
reason for the Christian faith he professes, wherever it may be asked
of him. He must be a physician, and above all a herbalist, so as in
wastes and solitudes to know the herbs that have the property of
healing wounds, for a knight-errant must not go looking for someone to
cure him at every step. He must be an astronomer, so as to know by the
stars how many hours of the night have passed, and what clime and
quarter of the world he is in. He must know mathematics, for at every
turn some occasion for them will present itself to him; and, putting it
aside that he must be adorned with all the virtues, cardinal and
theological, to come down to minor particulars, he must, I say, be able
to swim as well as Nicholas or Nicolao the Fish could, as the story
goes; he must know how to shoe a horse, and repair his saddle and
bridle; and, to return to higher matters, he must be faithful to God
and to his lady; he must be pure in thought, decorous in words,
generous in works, valiant in deeds, patient in suffering,
compassionate towards the needy, and, lastly, an upholder of the truth
though its defence should cost him his life. Of all these qualities,
great and small, is a true knight-errant made up; judge then, Señor Don
Lorenzo, whether it be a contemptible science which the knight who
studies and professes it has to learn, and whether it may not compare
with the very loftiest that are taught in the schools.”

“If that be so,” replied Don Lorenzo, “this science, I protest,
surpasses all.”

“How, if that be so?” said Don Quixote.

“What I mean to say,” said Don Lorenzo, “is, that I doubt whether there
are now, or ever were, any knights-errant, and adorned with such
virtues.”

“Many a time,” replied Don Quixote, “have I said what I now say once
more, that the majority of the world are of opinion that there never
were any knights-errant in it; and as it is my opinion that, un