is no wonder that the fair Lady
Angelica rejected him and left him for the gaiety, liveliness, and
grace of that budding-bearded little Moor to whom she surrendered
herself; and she showed her sense in falling in love with the gentle
softness of Medoro rather than the roughness of Roland.”

“That Angelica, señor curate,” returned Don Quixote, “was a giddy
damsel, flighty and somewhat wanton, and she left the world as full of
her vagaries as of the fame of her beauty. She treated with scorn a
thousand gentlemen, men of valour and wisdom, and took up with a
smooth-faced sprig of a page, without fortune or fame, except such
reputation for gratitude as the affection he bore his friend got for
him. The great poet who sang her beauty, the famous Ariosto, not caring
to sing her adventures after her contemptible surrender (which probably
were not over and above creditable), dropped her where he says:

How she received the sceptre of Cathay,
Some bard of defter quill may sing some day;


and this was no doubt a kind of prophecy, for poets are also called
_vates_, that is to say diviners; and its truth was made plain; for
since then a famous Andalusian poet has lamented and sung her tears,
and another famous and rare poet, a Castilian, has sung her beauty.”

“Tell me, Señor Don Quixote,” said the barber here, “among all those
who praised her, has there been no poet to write a satire on this Lady
Angelica?”

“I can well believe,” replied Don Quixote, “that if Sacripante or
Roland had been poets they would have given the damsel a trimming; for
it is naturally the way with poets who have been scorned and rejected
by their ladies, whether fictitious or not, in short by those whom they
select as the ladies of their thoughts, to avenge themselves in satires
and libels—a vengeance, to be sure, unworthy of generous hearts; but up
to the present I have not heard of any defamatory verse against the
Lady Angelica, who turned the world upside down.”

“Strange,” said the curate; but at this moment they heard the
housekeeper and the niece, who had previously withdrawn from the
conversation, exclaiming aloud in the courtyard, and at the noise they
all ran out.



p01e.jpg (15K)



CHAPTER II.
WHICH TREATS OF THE NOTABLE ALTERCATION WHICH SANCHO PANZA HAD WITH DON
QUIXOTE’S NIECE, AND HOUSEKEEPER, TOGETHER WITH OTHER DROLL MATTERS




p02a.jpg (159K)

Full Size



The history relates that the outcry Don Quixote, the curate, and the
barber heard came from the niece and the housekeeper exclaiming to
Sancho, who was striving to force his way in to see Don Quixote while
they held the door against him, “What does the vagabond want in this
house? Be off to your own, brother, for it is you, and no one else,
that delude my master, and lead him astray, and take him tramping about
the country.”

To which Sancho replied, “Devil’s own housekeeper! it is I who am
deluded, and led astray, and taken tramping about the country, and not
thy master! He has carried me all over the world, and you are mightily
mistaken. He enticed me away from home by a trick, promising me an
island, which I am still waiting for.”

“May evil islands choke thee, thou detestable Sancho,” said the niece;
“What are islands? Is it something to eat, glutton and gormandiser that
thou art?”

“It is not something to eat,” replied Sancho, “but something to govern
and rule, and better than four cities or four judgeships at court.”

“For all that,” said the housekeeper, “you don’t enter here, you bag of
mischief and sack of knavery; go govern your house and dig your
seed-patch, and give over looking for islands or shylands.”

The curate and the barber listened with great amusement to the words of
the three; but Don Quixote, uneasy lest Sancho should blab and blurt
out a whole heap of mischievous stupidities, and touch upon points that
might not be altogether to his credit, called to him and made the other
two ho