 her.”

“Well, well, Señor Don Quixote,” said the duchess, it is nearly
supper-time, and the duke is probably waiting; come let us go to
supper, and retire to rest early, for the journey you made yesterday
from Kandy was not such a short one but that it must have caused you
some fatigue.”

“I feel none, señora,” said Don Quixote, “for I would go so far as to
swear to your excellence that in all my life I never mounted a quieter
beast, or a pleasanter paced one, than Clavileño; and I don’t know what
could have induced Malambruno to discard a steed so swift and so
gentle, and burn it so recklessly as he did.”

“Probably,” said the duchess, “repenting of the evil he had done to the
Trifaldi and company, and others, and the crimes he must have committed
as a wizard and enchanter, he resolved to make away with all the
instruments of his craft; and so burned Clavileño as the chief one, and
that which mainly kept him restless, wandering from land to land; and
by its ashes and the trophy of the placard the valour of the great Don
Quixote of La Mancha is established for ever.”

Don Quixote renewed his thanks to the duchess; and having supped,
retired to his chamber alone, refusing to allow anyone to enter with
him to wait on him, such was his fear of encountering temptations that
might lead or drive him to forget his chaste fidelity to his lady
Dulcinea; for he had always present to his mind the virtue of Amadis,
that flower and mirror of knights-errant. He locked the door behind
him, and by the light of two wax candles undressed himself, but as he
was taking off his stockings—O disaster unworthy of such a
personage!—there came a burst, not of sighs, or anything belying his
delicacy or good breeding, but of some two dozen stitches in one of his
stockings, that made it look like a window-lattice. The worthy
gentleman was beyond measure distressed, and at that moment he would
have given an ounce of silver to have had half a drachm of green silk
there; I say green silk, because the stockings were green.

Here Cide Hamete exclaimed as he was writing, “O poverty, poverty! I
know not what could have possessed the great Cordovan poet to call thee
‘holy gift ungratefully received.’ Although a Moor, I know well enough
from the intercourse I have had with Christians that holiness consists
in charity, humility, faith, obedience, and poverty; but for all that,
I say he must have a great deal of godliness who can find any
satisfaction in being poor; unless, indeed, it be the kind of poverty
one of their greatest saints refers to, saying, ‘possess all things as
though ye possessed them not;’ which is what they call poverty in
spirit. But thou, that other poverty—for it is of thee I am speaking
now—why dost thou love to fall out with gentlemen and men of good birth
more than with other people? Why dost thou compel them to smear the
cracks in their shoes, and to have the buttons of their coats, one
silk, another hair, and another glass? Why must their ruffs be always
crinkled like endive leaves, and not crimped with a crimping iron?”
(From this we may perceive the antiquity of starch and crimped ruffs.)
Then he goes on: “Poor gentleman of good family! always cockering up
his honour, dining miserably and in secret, and making a hypocrite of
the toothpick with which he sallies out into the street after eating
nothing to oblige him to use it! Poor fellow, I say, with his nervous
honour, fancying they perceive a league off the patch on his shoe, the
sweat-stains on his hat, the shabbiness of his cloak, and the hunger of
his stomach!”

All this was brought home to Don Quixote by the bursting of his
stitches; however, he comforted himself on perceiving that Sancho had
left behind a pair of travelling boots, which he resolved to wear the
next day. At last he went to bed, out of spirits and heavy at heart, as
much because he missed Sancho as because of the irreparable disaster to
his stockings,