erything;” and as he
retired the other friend came forward and asked it, “Tell me, Head,
what are the wishes of my eldest son?”

“I have said already,” was the answer, “that I cannot judge of wishes;
however, I can tell thee the wish of thy son is to bury thee.”

“That’s ‘what I see with my eyes I point out with my finger,’” said the
gentleman, “so I ask no more.”

Don Antonio’s wife came up and said, “I know not what to ask thee,
Head; I would only seek to know of thee if I shall have many years of
enjoyment of my good husband;” and the answer she received was, “Thou
shalt, for his vigour and his temperate habits promise many years of
life, which by their intemperance others so often cut short.”

Then Don Quixote came forward and said, “Tell me, thou that answerest,
was that which I describe as having happened to me in the cave of
Montesinos the truth or a dream? Will Sancho’s whipping be accomplished
without fail? Will the disenchantment of Dulcinea be brought about?”



p62d.jpg (391K)

Full Size



“As to the question of the cave,” was the reply, “there is much to be
said; there is something of both in it. Sancho’s whipping will proceed
leisurely. The disenchantment of Dulcinea will attain its due
consummation.”

“I seek to know no more,” said Don Quixote; “let me but see Dulcinea
disenchanted, and I will consider that all the good fortune I could
wish for has come upon me all at once.”

The last questioner was Sancho, and his questions were, “Head, shall I
by any chance have another government? Shall I ever escape from the
hard life of a squire? Shall I get back to see my wife and children?”
To which the answer came, “Thou shalt govern in thy house; and if thou
returnest to it thou shalt see thy wife and children; and on ceasing to
serve thou shalt cease to be a squire.”

“Good, by God!” said Sancho Panza; “I could have told myself that; the
prophet Perogrullo could have said no more.”

“What answer wouldst thou have, beast?” said Don Quixote; “is it not
enough that the replies this head has given suit the questions put to
it?”

“Yes, it is enough,” said Sancho; “but I should have liked it to have
made itself plainer and told me more.”

The questions and answers came to an end here, but not the wonder with
which all were filled, except Don Antonio’s two friends who were in the
secret. This Cide Hamete Benengeli thought fit to reveal at once, not
to keep the world in suspense, fancying that the head had some strange
magical mystery in it. He says, therefore, that on the model of another
head, the work of an image maker, which he had seen at Madrid, Don
Antonio made this one at home for his own amusement and to astonish
ignorant people; and its mechanism was as follows. The table was of
wood painted and varnished to imitate jasper, and the pedestal on which
it stood was of the same material, with four eagles’ claws projecting
from it to support the weight more steadily. The head, which resembled
a bust or figure of a Roman emperor, and was coloured like bronze, was
hollow throughout, as was the table, into which it was fitted so
exactly that no trace of the joining was visible. The pedestal of the
table was also hollow and communicated with the throat and neck of the
head, and the whole was in communication with another room underneath
the chamber in which the head stood. Through the entire cavity in the
pedestal, table, throat and neck of the bust or figure, there passed a
tube of tin carefully adjusted and concealed from sight. In the room
below corresponding to the one above was placed the person who was to
answer, with his mouth to the tube, and the voice, as in an
ear-trumpet, passed from above downwards, and from below upwards, the
words coming clearly and distinctly; it was impossible, thus, to detect
the trick. A nephew of Don Antonio’s, a smart sharp-witted student, was
the answerer, and as he had been told beforehand by his uncle who th