
every step. Write to thy lord and lady and show thyself grateful to
them, for ingratitude is the daughter of pride, and one of the greatest
sins we know of; and he who is grateful to those who have been good to
him shows that he will be so to God also who has bestowed and still
bestows so many blessings upon him.
    My lady the duchess sent off a messenger with thy suit and another
    present to thy wife Teresa Panza; we expect the answer every
    moment. I have been a little indisposed through a certain
    scratching I came in for, not very much to the benefit of my nose;
    but it was nothing; for if there are enchanters who maltreat me,
    there are also some who defend me. Let me know if the majordomo who
    is with thee had any share in the Trifaldi performance, as thou
    didst suspect; and keep me informed of everything that happens
    thee, as the distance is so short; all the more as I am thinking of
    giving over very shortly this idle life I am now leading, for I was
    not born for it. A thing has occurred to me which I am inclined to
    think will put me out of favour with the duke and duchess; but
    though I am sorry for it I do not care, for after all I must obey
    my calling rather than their pleasure, in accordance with the
    common saying, _amicus Plato, sed magis amica veritas_. I quote
    this Latin to thee because I conclude that since thou hast been a
    governor thou wilt have learned it. Adieu; God keep thee from being
    an object of pity to anyone.


Thy friend,
DON QUIXOTE OF LA MANCHA.


Sancho listened to the letter with great attention, and it was praised
and considered wise by all who heard it; he then rose up from table,
and calling his secretary shut himself in with him in his own room, and
without putting it off any longer set about answering his master Don
Quixote at once; and he bade the secretary write down what he told him
without adding or suppressing anything, which he did, and the answer
was to the following effect.

SANCHO PANZA’S LETTER TO DON QUIXOTE OF LA MANCHA.


The pressure of business is so great upon me that I have no time to
scratch my head or even to cut my nails; and I have them so long—God
send a remedy for it. I say this, master of my soul, that you may not
be surprised if I have not until now sent you word of how I fare, well
or ill, in this government, in which I am suffering more hunger than
when we two were wandering through the woods and wastes.
    My lord the duke wrote to me the other day to warn me that certain
    spies had got into this island to kill me; but up to the present I
    have not found out any except a certain doctor who receives a
    salary in this town for killing all the governors that come here;
    he is called Doctor Pedro Recio, and is from Tirteafuera; so you
    see what a name he has to make me dread dying under his hands. This
    doctor says of himself that he does not cure diseases when there
    are any, but prevents them coming, and the medicines he uses are
    diet and more diet until he brings one down to bare bones; as if
    leanness was not worse than fever.
    In short he is killing me with hunger, and I am dying myself of
    vexation; for when I thought I was coming to this government to get
    my meat hot and my drink cool, and take my ease between holland
    sheets on feather beds, I find I have come to do penance as if I
    was a hermit; and as I don’t do it willingly I suspect that in the
    end the devil will carry me off.
    So far I have not handled any dues or taken any bribes, and I don’t
    know what to think of it; for here they tell me that the governors
    that come to this island, before entering it have plenty of money
    either given to them or lent to them by the people of the town, and
    that this is the usual custom not only here but with all who enter
    upon governments.
    Last night going the rounds