 up the fallen and makes rich the poor.”

Don Quixote was about to thank him, when they heard behind them a noise
as of a troop of horses; there was, however, but one, riding on which
at a furious pace came a youth, apparently about twenty years of age,
clad in green damask edged with gold and breeches and a loose frock,
with a hat looped up in the Walloon fashion, tight-fitting polished
boots, gilt spurs, dagger and sword, and in his hand a musketoon, and a
pair of pistols at his waist.

Roque turned round at the noise and perceived this comely figure, which
drawing near thus addressed him, “I came in quest of thee, valiant
Roque, to find in thee if not a remedy at least relief in my
misfortune; and not to keep thee in suspense, for I see thou dost not
recognise me, I will tell thee who I am; I am Claudia Jeronima, the
daughter of Simon Forte, thy good friend, and special enemy of Clauquel
Torrellas, who is thine also as being of the faction opposed to thee.
Thou knowest that this Torrellas has a son who is called, or at least
was not two hours since, Don Vicente Torrellas. Well, to cut short the
tale of my misfortune, I will tell thee in a few words what this youth
has brought upon me. He saw me, he paid court to me, I listened to him,
and, unknown to my father, I loved him; for there is no woman, however
secluded she may live or close she may be kept, who will not have
opportunities and to spare for following her headlong impulses. In a
word, he pledged himself to be mine, and I promised to be his, without
carrying matters any further. Yesterday I learned that, forgetful of
his pledge to me, he was about to marry another, and that he was to go
this morning to plight his troth, intelligence which overwhelmed and
exasperated me; my father not being at home I was able to adopt this
costume you see, and urging my horse to speed I overtook Don Vicente
about a league from this, and without waiting to utter reproaches or
hear excuses I fired this musket at him, and these two pistols besides,
and to the best of my belief I must have lodged more than two bullets
in his body, opening doors to let my honour go free, enveloped in his
blood. I left him there in the hands of his servants, who did not dare
and were not able to interfere in his defence, and I come to seek from
thee a safe-conduct into France, where I have relatives with whom I can
live; and also to implore thee to protect my father, so that Don
Vicente’s numerous kinsmen may not venture to wreak their lawless
vengeance upon him.”

Roque, filled with admiration at the gallant bearing, high spirit,
comely figure, and adventure of the fair Claudia, said to her, “Come,
señora, let us go and see if thy enemy is dead; and then we will
consider what will be best for thee.” Don Quixote, who had been
listening to what Claudia said and Roque Guinart said in reply to her,
exclaimed, “Nobody need trouble himself with the defence of this lady,
for I take it upon myself. Give me my horse and arms, and wait for me
here; I will go in quest of this knight, and dead or alive I will make
him keep his word plighted to so great beauty.”

“Nobody need have any doubt about that,” said Sancho, “for my master
has a very happy knack of matchmaking; it’s not many days since he
forced another man to marry, who in the same way backed out of his
promise to another maiden; and if it had not been for his persecutors
the enchanters changing the man’s proper shape into a lacquey’s the
said maiden would not be one this minute.”

Roque, who was paying more attention to the fair Claudia’s adventure
than to the words of master or man, did not hear them; and ordering his
squires to restore to Sancho everything they had stripped Dapple of, he
directed them to return to the place where they had been quartered
during the night, and then set off with Claudia at full speed in search
of the wounded or slain Don Vicente. They reached the spot where
Claudi