
charitable deeds; but whose generous intentions have been found wanting
in my case only, blessed and praised be the highest heavens! Verily,
knight of the rueful figure he must be to have disfigured mine.”

Sancho Panza was touched by Master Pedro’s words, and said to him,
“Don’t weep and lament, Master Pedro; you break my heart; let me tell
you my master, Don Quixote, is so catholic and scrupulous a Christian
that, if he can make out that he has done you any wrong, he will own
it, and be willing to pay for it and make it good, and something over
and above.”

“Only let Señor Don Quixote pay me for some part of the work he has
destroyed,” said Master Pedro, “and I would be content, and his worship
would ease his conscience, for he cannot be saved who keeps what is
another’s against the owner’s will, and makes no restitution.”

“That is true,” said Don Quixote; “but at present I am not aware that I
have got anything of yours, Master Pedro.”

“What!” returned Master Pedro; “and these relics lying here on the bare
hard ground—what scattered and shattered them but the invincible
strength of that mighty arm? And whose were the bodies they belonged to
but mine? And what did I get my living by but by them?”

“Now am I fully convinced,” said Don Quixote, “of what I had many a
time before believed; that the enchanters who persecute me do nothing
more than put figures like these before my eyes, and then change and
turn them into what they please. In truth and earnest, I assure you
gentlemen who now hear me, that to me everything that has taken place
here seemed to take place literally, that Melisendra was Melisendra,
Don Gaiferos Don Gaiferos, Marsilio Marsilio, and Charlemagne
Charlemagne. That was why my anger was roused; and to be faithful to my
calling as a knight-errant I sought to give aid and protection to those
who fled, and with this good intention I did what you have seen. If the
result has been the opposite of what I intended, it is no fault of
mine, but of those wicked beings that persecute me; but, for all that,
I am willing to condemn myself in costs for this error of mine, though
it did not proceed from malice; let Master Pedro see what he wants for
the spoiled figures, for I agree to pay it at once in good and current
money of Castile.”

Master Pedro made him a bow, saying, “I expected no less of the rare
Christianity of the valiant Don Quixote of La Mancha, true helper and
protector of all destitute and needy vagabonds; master landlord here
and the great Sancho Panza shall be the arbitrators and appraisers
between your worship and me of what these dilapidated figures are worth
or may be worth.”

The landlord and Sancho consented, and then Master Pedro picked up from
the ground King Marsilio of Saragossa with his head off, and said,
“Here you see how impossible it is to restore this king to his former
state, so I think, saving your better judgments, that for his death,
decease, and demise, four reals and a half may be given me.”

“Proceed,” said Don Quixote.

“Well then, for this cleavage from top to bottom,” continued Master
Pedro, taking up the split Emperor Charlemagne, “it would not be much
if I were to ask five reals and a quarter.”

“It’s not little,” said Sancho.

“Nor is it much,” said the landlord; “make it even, and say five
reals.”

“Let him have the whole five and a quarter,” said Don Quixote; “for the
sum total of this notable disaster does not stand on a quarter more or
less; and make an end of it quickly, Master Pedro, for it’s getting on
to supper-time, and I have some hints of hunger.”

“For this figure,” said Master Pedro, “that is without a nose, and
wants an eye, and is the fair Melisendra, I ask, and I am reasonable in
my charge, two reals and twelve maravedis.”

“The very devil must be in it,” said Don Quixote, “if Melisendra and
her husband are not by this time at least on the French border, for the
horse they rode on seem