ess than with
rudeness; and it is not seemly to call the sinner roundly blockhead and
booby, without knowing anything of the sin that is reproved. Come, tell
me, for which of the stupidities you have observed in me do you condemn
and abuse me, and bid me go home and look after my house and wife and
children, without knowing whether I have any? Is nothing more needed
than to get a footing, by hook or by crook, in other people’s houses to
rule over the masters (and that, perhaps, after having been brought up
in all the straitness of some seminary, and without having ever seen
more of the world than may lie within twenty or thirty leagues round),
to fit one to lay down the law rashly for chivalry, and pass judgment
on knights-errant? Is it, haply, an idle occupation, or is the time
ill-spent that is spent in roaming the world in quest, not of its
enjoyments, but of those arduous toils whereby the good mount upwards
to the abodes of everlasting life? If gentlemen, great lords, nobles,
men of high birth, were to rate me as a fool I should take it as an
irreparable insult; but I care not a farthing if clerks who have never
entered upon or trod the paths of chivalry should think me foolish.
Knight I am, and knight I will die, if such be the pleasure of the Most
High. Some take the broad road of overweening ambition; others that of
mean and servile flattery; others that of deceitful hypocrisy, and some
that of true religion; but I, led by my star, follow the narrow path of
knight-errantry, and in pursuit of that calling I despise wealth, but
not honour. I have redressed injuries, righted wrongs, punished
insolences, vanquished giants, and crushed monsters; I am in love, for
no other reason than that it is incumbent on knights-errant to be so;
but though I am, I am no carnal-minded lover, but one of the chaste,
platonic sort. My intentions are always directed to worthy ends, to do
good to all and evil to none; and if he who means this, does this, and
makes this his practice deserves to be called a fool, it is for your
highnesses to say, O most excellent duke and duchess.”

“Good, by God!” cried Sancho; “say no more in your own defence, master
mine, for there’s nothing more in the world to be said, thought, or
insisted on; and besides, when this gentleman denies, as he has, that
there are or ever have been any knights-errant in the world, is it any
wonder if he knows nothing of what he has been talking about?”

“Perhaps, brother,” said the ecclesiastic, “you are that Sancho Panza
that is mentioned, to whom your master has promised an island?”

“Yes, I am,” said Sancho, “and what’s more, I am one who deserves it as
much as anyone; I am one of the sort—‘Attach thyself to the good, and
thou wilt be one of them,’ and of those, ‘Not with whom thou art bred,
but with whom thou art fed,’ and of those, ‘Who leans against a good
tree, a good shade covers him;’ I have leant upon a good master, and I
have been for months going about with him, and please God I shall be
just such another; long life to him and long life to me, for neither
will he be in any want of empires to rule, or I of islands to govern.”

“No, Sancho my friend, certainly not,” said the duke, “for in the name
of Señor Don Quixote I confer upon you the government of one of no
small importance that I have at my disposal.”

“Go down on thy knees, Sancho,” said Don Quixote, “and kiss the feet of
his excellence for the favour he has bestowed upon thee.”

Sancho obeyed, and on seeing this the ecclesiastic stood up from table
completely out of temper, exclaiming, “By the gown I wear, I am almost
inclined to say that your excellence is as great a fool as these
sinners. No wonder they are mad, when people who are in their senses
sanction their madness! I leave your excellence with them, for so long
as they are in the house, I will remain in my own, and spare myself the
trouble of reproving what I cannot remedy;” and without utt