by this time Sancho had risen, rather the worse for the handling of
the friars’ muleteers, and stood watching the battle of his master, Don
Quixote, and praying to God in his heart that it might be his will to
grant him the victory, and that he might thereby win some island to
make him governor of, as he had promised. Seeing, therefore, that the
struggle was now over, and that his master was returning to mount
Rocinante, he approached to hold the stirrup for him, and, before he
could mount, he went on his knees before him, and taking his hand,
kissed it saying, “May it please your worship, Señor Don Quixote, to
give me the government of that island which has been won in this hard
fight, for be it ever so big I feel myself in sufficient force to be
able to govern it as much and as well as anyone in the world who has
ever governed islands.”

To which Don Quixote replied, “Thou must take notice, brother Sancho,
that this adventure and those like it are not adventures of islands,
but of cross-roads, in which nothing is got except a broken head or an
ear the less: have patience, for adventures will present themselves
from which I may make you, not only a governor, but something more.”

Sancho gave him many thanks, and again kissing his hand and the skirt
of his hauberk, helped him to mount Rocinante, and mounting his ass
himself, proceeded to follow his master, who at a brisk pace, without
taking leave, or saying anything further to the ladies belonging to the
coach, turned into a wood that was hard by. Sancho followed him at his
ass’s best trot, but Rocinante stepped out so that, seeing himself left
behind, he was forced to call to his master to wait for him. Don
Quixote did so, reining in Rocinante until his weary squire came up,
who on reaching him said, “It seems to me, señor, it would be prudent
in us to go and take refuge in some church, for, seeing how mauled he
with whom you fought has been left, it will be no wonder if they give
information of the affair to the Holy Brotherhood and arrest us, and,
faith, if they do, before we come out of gaol we shall have to sweat
for it.”

“Peace,” said Don Quixote; “where hast thou ever seen or heard that a
knight-errant has been arraigned before a court of justice, however
many homicides he may have committed?”

“I know nothing about omecils,” answered Sancho, “nor in my life have
had anything to do with one; I only know that the Holy Brotherhood
looks after those who fight in the fields, and in that other matter I
do not meddle.”

“Then thou needst have no uneasiness, my friend,” said Don Quixote,
“for I will deliver thee out of the hands of the Chaldeans, much more
out of those of the Brotherhood. But tell me, as thou livest, hast thou
seen a more valiant knight than I in all the known world; hast thou
read in history of any who has or had higher mettle in attack, more
spirit in maintaining it, more dexterity in wounding or skill in
overthrowing?”

“The truth is,” answered Sancho, “that I have never read any history,
for I can neither read nor write, but what I will venture to bet is
that a more daring master than your worship I have never served in all
the days of my life, and God grant that this daring be not paid for
where I have said; what I beg of your worship is to dress your wound,
for a great deal of blood flows from that ear, and I have here some
lint and a little white ointment in the alforjas.”

“All that might be well dispensed with,” said Don Quixote, “if I had
remembered to make a vial of the balsam of Fierabras, for time and
medicine are saved by one single drop.”

“What vial and what balsam is that?” said Sancho Panza.

“It is a balsam,” answered Don Quixote, “the receipt of which I have in
my memory, with which one need have no fear of death, or dread dying of
any wound; and so when I make it and give it to thee thou hast nothing
to do when in some battle thou seest they have cut me in half through