her heaven, so great was his grief at finding
he was leaving you, that he plunged into the bowels of the earth;
however, as he cannot help following his natural course, he from time
to time comes forth and shows himself to the sun and the world. The
lakes aforesaid send him their waters, and with these, and others that
come to him, he makes a grand and imposing entrance into Portugal; but
for all that, go where he may, he shows his melancholy and sadness, and
takes no pride in breeding dainty choice fish, only coarse and
tasteless sorts, very different from those of the golden Tagus. All
this that I tell you now, O cousin mine, I have told you many times
before, and as you make no answer, I fear that either you believe me
not, or do not hear me, whereat I feel God knows what grief. I have now
news to give you, which, if it serves not to alleviate your sufferings,
will not in any wise increase them. Know that you have here before you
(open your eyes and you will see) that great knight of whom the sage
Merlin has prophesied such great things; that Don Quixote of La Mancha
I mean, who has again, and to better purpose than in past times,
revived in these days knight-errantry, long since forgotten, and by
whose intervention and aid it may be we shall be disenchanted; for
great deeds are reserved for great men.’

“‘And if that may not be,’ said the wretched Durandarte in a low and
feeble voice, ‘if that may not be, then, my cousin, I say “patience and
shuffle;”’ and turning over on his side, he relapsed into his former
silence without uttering another word.



p23c.jpg (331K)

Full Size



“And now there was heard a great outcry and lamentation, accompanied by
deep sighs and bitter sobs. I looked round, and through the crystal
wall I saw passing through another chamber a procession of two lines of
fair damsels all clad in mourning, and with white turbans of Turkish
fashion on their heads. Behind, in the rear of these, there came a
lady, for so from her dignity she seemed to be, also clad in black,
with a white veil so long and ample that it swept the ground. Her
turban was twice as large as the largest of any of the others; her
eyebrows met, her nose was rather flat, her mouth was large but with
ruddy lips, and her teeth, of which at times she allowed a glimpse,
were seen to be sparse and ill-set, though as white as peeled almonds.
She carried in her hands a fine cloth, and in it, as well as I could
make out, a heart that had been mummied, so parched and dried was it.
Montesinos told me that all those forming the procession were the
attendants of Durandarte and Belerma, who were enchanted there with
their master and mistress, and that the last, she who carried the heart
in the cloth, was the lady Belerma, who, with her damsels, four days in
the week went in procession singing, or rather weeping, dirges over the
body and miserable heart of his cousin; and that if she appeared to me
somewhat ill-favoured or not so beautiful as fame reported her, it was
because of the bad nights and worse days that she passed in that
enchantment, as I could see by the great dark circles round her eyes,
and her sickly complexion; ‘her sallowness, and the rings round her
eyes,’ said he, ‘are not caused by the periodical ailment usual with
women, for it is many months and even years since she has had any, but
by the grief her own heart suffers because of that which she holds in
her hand perpetually, and which recalls and brings back to her memory
the sad fate of her lost lover; were it not for this, hardly would the
great Dulcinea del Toboso, so celebrated in all these parts, and even
in the world, come up to her for beauty, grace, and gaiety.’

“‘Hold hard!’ said I at this, ‘tell your story as you ought, Señor Don
Montesinos, for you know very well that all comparisons are odious, and
there is no occasion to compare one person with another; the peerless
Dulcinea del Toboso is what she is