 the Lions be it,” continued the duke; “I say, let Sir Knight of
the Lions come to a castle of mine close by, where he shall be given
that reception which is due to so exalted a personage, and which the
duchess and I are wont to give to all knights-errant who come there.”

By this time Sancho had fixed and girthed Rocinante’s saddle, and Don
Quixote having got on his back and the duke mounted a fine horse, they
placed the duchess in the middle and set out for the castle. The
duchess desired Sancho to come to her side, for she found infinite
enjoyment in listening to his shrewd remarks. Sancho required no
pressing, but pushed himself in between them and the duke, who thought
it rare good fortune to receive such a knight-errant and such a homely
squire in their castle.



p30e.jpg (54K)



CHAPTER XXXI.
WHICH TREATS OF MANY AND GREAT MATTERS




p31a.jpg (155K)

Full Size



Supreme was the satisfaction that Sancho felt at seeing himself, as it
seemed, an established favourite with the duchess, for he looked
forward to finding in her castle what he had found in Don Diego’s house
and in Basilio’s; he was always fond of good living, and always seized
by the forelock any opportunity of feasting himself whenever it
presented itself. The history informs us, then, that before they
reached the country house or castle, the duke went on in advance and
instructed all his servants how they were to treat Don Quixote; and so
the instant he came up to the castle gates with the duchess, two
lackeys or equerries, clad in what they call morning gowns of fine
crimson satin reaching to their feet, hastened out, and catching Don
Quixote in their arms before he saw or heard them, said to him, “Your
highness should go and take my lady the duchess off her horse.”



p31b.jpg (334K)

Full Size



Don Quixote obeyed, and great bandying of compliments followed between
the two over the matter; but in the end the duchess’s determination
carried the day, and she refused to get down or dismount from her
palfrey except in the arms of the duke, saying she did not consider
herself worthy to impose so unnecessary a burden on so great a knight.
At length the duke came out to take her down, and as they entered a
spacious court two fair damsels came forward and threw over Don
Quixote’s shoulders a large mantle of the finest scarlet cloth, and at
the same instant all the galleries of the court were lined with the
men-servants and women-servants of the household, crying, “Welcome,
flower and cream of knight-errantry!” while all or most of them flung
pellets filled with scented water over Don Quixote and the duke and
duchess; at all which Don Quixote was greatly astonished, and this was
the first time that he thoroughly felt and believed himself to be a
knight-errant in reality and not merely in fancy, now that he saw
himself treated in the same way as he had read of such knights being
treated in days of yore.

Sancho, deserting Dapple, hung on to the duchess and entered the
castle, but feeling some twinges of conscience at having left the ass
alone, he approached a respectable duenna who had come out with the
rest to receive the duchess, and in a low voice he said to her, “Señora
Gonzalez, or however your grace may be called—”

“I am called Doña Rodriguez de Grijalba,” replied the duenna; “what is
your will, brother?” To which Sancho made answer, “I should be glad if
your worship would do me the favour to go out to the castle gate, where
you will find a grey ass of mine; make them, if you please, put him in
the stable, or put him there yourself, for the poor little beast is
rather easily frightened, and cannot bear being alone at all.”

“If the master is as wise as the man,” said the duenna, “we have got a
fine bargain. Be off with you, brother, and bad luck to you and him who
brought you here; go, look after your ass, for we, the duennas of this
house, are not used to work of tha