hin the tomb-

They gnaw me now, they gnaw me now,
There where I most did sin.


And according to that the gentleman has good reason to say he would
rather be a labouring man than a king, if vermin are to eat him.”

The duchess could not help laughing at the simplicity of her duenna, or
wondering at the language and proverbs of Sancho, to whom she said,
“Worthy Sancho knows very well that when once a knight has made a
promise he strives to keep it, though it should cost him his life. My
lord and husband the duke, though not one of the errant sort, is none
the less a knight for that reason, and will keep his word about the
promised island, in spite of the envy and malice of the world. Let
Sancho be of good cheer; for when he least expects it he will find
himself seated on the throne of his island and seat of dignity, and
will take possession of his government that he may discard it for
another of three-bordered brocade. The charge I give him is to be
careful how he governs his vassals, bearing in mind that they are all
loyal and well-born.”

“As to governing them well,” said Sancho, “there’s no need of charging
me to do that, for I’m kind-hearted by nature, and full of compassion
for the poor; there’s no stealing the loaf from him who kneads and
bakes;’ and by my faith it won’t do to throw false dice with me; I am
an old dog, and I know all about ‘tus, tus;’ I can be wide-awake if
need be, and I don’t let clouds come before my eyes, for I know where
the shoe pinches me; I say so, because with me the good will have
support and protection, and the bad neither footing nor access. And it
seems to me that, in governments, to make a beginning is everything;
and maybe, after having been governor a fortnight, I’ll take kindly to
the work and know more about it than the field labour I have been
brought up to.”

“You are right, Sancho,” said the duchess, “for no one is born ready
taught, and the bishops are made out of men and not out of stones. But
to return to the subject we were discussing just now, the enchantment
of the lady Dulcinea, I look upon it as certain, and something more
than evident, that Sancho’s idea of practising a deception upon his
master, making him believe that the peasant girl was Dulcinea and that
if he did not recognise her it must be because she was enchanted, was
all a device of one of the enchanters that persecute Don Quixote. For
in truth and earnest, I know from good authority that the coarse
country wench who jumped up on the ass was and is Dulcinea del Toboso,
and that worthy Sancho, though he fancies himself the deceiver, is the
one that is deceived; and that there is no more reason to doubt the
truth of this, than of anything else we never saw. Señor Sancho Panza
must know that we too have enchanters here that are well disposed to
us, and tell us what goes on in the world, plainly and distinctly,
without subterfuge or deception; and believe me, Sancho, that agile
country lass was and is Dulcinea del Toboso, who is as much enchanted
as the mother that bore her; and when we least expect it, we shall see
her in her own proper form, and then Sancho will be disabused of the
error he is under at present.”

“All that’s very possible,” said Sancho Panza; “and now I’m willing to
believe what my master says about what he saw in the cave of
Montesinos, where he says he saw the lady Dulcinea del Toboso in the
very same dress and apparel that I said I had seen her in when I
enchanted her all to please myself. It must be all exactly the other
way, as your ladyship says; because it is impossible to suppose that
out of my poor wit such a cunning trick could be concocted in a moment,
nor do I think my master is so mad that by my weak and feeble
persuasion he could be made to believe a thing so out of all reason.
But, señora, your excellence must not therefore think me ill-disposed,
for a dolt like me is not bound to see into the thoughts and plots of
tho