 voice no
less solemn than that of the first, “I am the sage Alquife, the great
friend of Urganda the Unknown,” and passed on. Then another cart came
by at the same pace, but the occupant of the throne was not old like
the others, but a man stalwart and robust, and of a forbidding
countenance, who as he came up said in a voice far hoarser and more
devilish, “I am the enchanter Archelaus, the mortal enemy of Amadis of
Gaul and all his kindred,” and then passed on. Having gone a short
distance the three carts halted and the monotonous noise of their
wheels ceased, and soon after they heard another, not noise, but sound
of sweet, harmonious music, of which Sancho was very glad, taking it to
be a good sign; and said he to the duchess, from whom he did not stir a
step, or for a single instant, “Señora, where there’s music there can’t
be mischief.”

“Nor where there are lights and it is bright,” said the duchess; to
which Sancho replied, “Fire gives light, and it’s bright where there
are bonfires, as we see by those that are all round us and perhaps may
burn us; but music is a sign of mirth and merrymaking.”

“That remains to be seen,” said Don Quixote, who was listening to all
that passed; and he was right, as is shown in the following chapter.



p34e.jpg (47K)



CHAPTER XXXV.
WHEREIN IS CONTINUED THE INSTRUCTION GIVEN TO DON QUIXOTE TOUCHING THE
DISENCHANTMENT OF DULCINEA, TOGETHER WITH OTHER MARVELLOUS INCIDENTS




p35a.jpg (108K)

Full Size



They saw advancing towards them, to the sound of this pleasing music,
what they call a triumphal car, drawn by six grey mules with white
linen housings, on each of which was mounted a penitent, robed also in
white, with a large lighted wax taper in his hand. The car was twice
or, perhaps, three times as large as the former ones, and in front and
on the sides stood twelve more penitents, all as white as snow and all
with lighted tapers, a spectacle to excite fear as well as wonder; and
on a raised throne was seated a nymph draped in a multitude of
silver-tissue veils with an embroidery of countless gold spangles
glittering all over them, that made her appear, if not richly, at least
brilliantly, apparelled. She had her face covered with thin transparent
sendal, the texture of which did not prevent the fair features of a
maiden from being distinguished, while the numerous lights made it
possible to judge of her beauty and of her years, which seemed to be
not less than seventeen but not to have yet reached twenty. Beside her
was a figure in a robe of state, as they call it, reaching to the feet,
while the head was covered with a black veil. But the instant the car
was opposite the duke and duchess and Don Quixote the music of the
clarions ceased, and then that of the lutes and harps on the car, and
the figure in the robe rose up, and flinging it apart and removing the
veil from its face, disclosed to their eyes the shape of Death itself,
fleshless and hideous, at which sight Don Quixote felt uneasy, Sancho
frightened, and the duke and duchess displayed a certain trepidation.
Having risen to its feet, this living death, in a sleepy voice and with
a tongue hardly awake, held forth as follows:



p35b.jpg (232K)

Full Size



I am that Merlin who the legends say
The devil had for father, and the lie
Hath gathered credence with the lapse of time.
Of magic prince, of Zoroastric lore
Monarch and treasurer, with jealous eye
I view the efforts of the age to hide
The gallant deeds of doughty errant knights,
Who are, and ever have been, dear to me.
    Enchanters and magicians and their kind
Are mostly hard of heart; not so am I;
For mine is tender, soft, compassionate,
And its delight is doing good to all.
In the dim caverns of the gloomy Dis,
Where, tracing mystic lines and characters,
My soul abideth now, there came to me
The sorrow-laden plaint of her, the fair,
The peerless Dulcinea del Toboso.
I knew o