ich may be reckoned at as much more.”

“But for that,” said Sancho, “the squire must be unmarried, and must
know, at any rate, how to help at mass, and if that be so, woe is me,
for I am married already and I don’t know the first letter of the A B
C. What will become of me if my master takes a fancy to be an
archbishop and not an emperor, as is usual and customary with
knights-errant?”

“Be not uneasy, friend Sancho,” said the barber, “for we will entreat
your master, and advise him, even urging it upon him as a case of
conscience, to become an emperor and not an archbishop, because it will
be easier for him as he is more valiant than lettered.”

“So I have thought,” said Sancho; “though I can tell you he is fit for
anything: what I mean to do for my part is to pray to our Lord to place
him where it may be best for him, and where he may be able to bestow
most favours upon me.”

“You speak like a man of sense,” said the curate, “and you will be
acting like a good Christian; but what must now be done is to take
steps to coax your master out of that useless penance you say he is
performing; and we had best turn into this inn to consider what plan to
adopt, and also to dine, for it is now time.”

Sancho said they might go in, but that he would wait there outside, and
that he would tell them afterwards the reason why he was unwilling, and
why it did not suit him to enter it; but he begged them to bring him
out something to eat, and to let it be hot, and also to bring barley
for Rocinante. They left him and went in, and presently the barber
brought him out something to eat. By-and-by, after they had between
them carefully thought over what they should do to carry out their
object, the curate hit upon an idea very well adapted to humour Don
Quixote, and effect their purpose; and his notion, which he explained
to the barber, was that he himself should assume the disguise of a
wandering damsel, while the other should try as best he could to pass
for a squire, and that they should thus proceed to where Don Quixote
was, and he, pretending to be an aggrieved and distressed damsel,
should ask a favour of him, which as a valiant knight-errant he could
not refuse to grant; and the favour he meant to ask him was that he
should accompany her whither she would conduct him, in order to redress
a wrong which a wicked knight had done her, while at the same time she
should entreat him not to require her to remove her mask, nor ask her
any question touching her circumstances until he had righted her with
the wicked knight. And he had no doubt that Don Quixote would comply
with any request made in these terms, and that in this way they might
remove him and take him to his own village, where they would endeavour
to find out if his extraordinary madness admitted of any kind of
remedy.



c26e.jpg (48K)



CHAPTER XXVII.
OF HOW THE CURATE AND THE BARBER PROCEEDED WITH THEIR SCHEME; TOGETHER
WITH OTHER MATTERS WORTHY OF RECORD IN THIS GREAT HISTORY




c27a.jpg (169K)

Full Size




The curate’s plan did not seem a bad one to the barber, but on the
contrary so good that they immediately set about putting it in
execution. They begged a petticoat and hood of the landlady, leaving
her in pledge a new cassock of the curate’s; and the barber made a
beard out of a grey-brown or red ox-tail in which the landlord used to
stick his comb. The landlady asked them what they wanted these things
for, and the curate told her in a few words about the madness of Don
Quixote, and how this disguise was intended to get him away from the
mountain where he then was. The landlord and landlady immediately came
to the conclusion that the madman was their guest, the balsam man and
master of the blanketed squire, and they told the curate all that had
passed between him and them, not omitting what Sancho had been so
silent about. Finally the landlady dressed up the curate in a style
that left nothing