
wife, and my father, led away by what he considers Don Fernando’s
superiority over you, has favoured his suit so cordially, that in two
days hence the betrothal is to take place with such secrecy and so
privately that the only witnesses are to be the Heavens above and a few
of the household. Picture to yourself the state I am in; judge if it be
urgent for you to come; the issue of the affair will show you whether I
love you or not. God grant this may come to your hand before mine shall
be forced to link itself with his who keeps so ill the faith that he
has pledged.


“Such, in brief, were the words of the letter, words that made me set
out at once without waiting any longer for reply or money; for I now
saw clearly that it was not the purchase of horses but of his own
pleasure that had made Don Fernando send me to his brother. The
exasperation I felt against Don Fernando, joined with the fear of
losing the prize I had won by so many years of love and devotion, lent
me wings; so that almost flying I reached home the same day, by the
hour which served for speaking with Luscinda. I arrived unobserved, and
left the mule on which I had come at the house of the worthy man who
had brought me the letter, and fortune was pleased to be for once so
kind that I found Luscinda at the grating that was the witness of our
loves. She recognised me at once, and I her, but not as she ought to
have recognised me, or I her. But who is there in the world that can
boast of having fathomed or understood the wavering mind and unstable
nature of a woman? Of a truth no one. To proceed: as soon as Luscinda
saw me she said, ‘Cardenio, I am in my bridal dress, and the
treacherous Don Fernando and my covetous father are waiting for me in
the hall with the other witnesses, who shall be the witnesses of my
death before they witness my betrothal. Be not distressed, my friend,
but contrive to be present at this sacrifice, and if that cannot be
prevented by my words, I have a dagger concealed which will prevent
more deliberate violence, putting an end to my life and giving thee a
first proof of the love I have borne and bear thee.’ I replied to her
distractedly and hastily, in fear lest I should not have time to reply,
‘May thy words be verified by thy deeds, lady; and if thou hast a
dagger to save thy honour, I have a sword to defend thee or kill myself
if fortune be against us.’

“I think she could not have heard all these words, for I perceived that
they called her away in haste, as the bridegroom was waiting. Now the
night of my sorrow set in, the sun of my happiness went down, I felt my
eyes bereft of sight, my mind of reason. I could not enter the house,
nor was I capable of any movement; but reflecting how important it was
that I should be present at what might take place on the occasion, I
nerved myself as best I could and went in, for I well knew all the
entrances and outlets; and besides, with the confusion that in secret
pervaded the house no one took notice of me, so, without being seen, I
found an opportunity of placing myself in the recess formed by a window
of the hall itself, and concealed by the ends and borders of two
tapestries, from between which I could, without being seen, see all
that took place in the room. Who could describe the agitation of heart
I suffered as I stood there—the thoughts that came to me—the
reflections that passed through my mind? They were such as cannot be,
nor were it well they should be, told. Suffice it to say that the
bridegroom entered the hall in his usual dress, without ornament of any
kind; as groomsman he had with him a cousin of Luscinda’s and except
the servants of the house there was no one else in the chamber. Soon
afterwards Luscinda came out from an antechamber, attended by her
mother and two of her damsels, arrayed and adorned as became her rank
and beauty, and in full festival and ceremonial attire. My anxiety and
distraction did not allow 