ld their tongues and let him come in. Sancho entered, and the
curate and the barber took their leave of Don Quixote, of whose
recovery they despaired when they saw how wedded he was to his crazy
ideas, and how saturated with the nonsense of his unlucky chivalry; and
said the curate to the barber, “You will see, gossip, that when we are
least thinking of it, our gentleman will be off once more for another
flight.”

“I have no doubt of it,” returned the barber; “but I do not wonder so
much at the madness of the knight as at the simplicity of the squire,
who has such a firm belief in all that about the island, that I suppose
all the exposures that could be imagined would not get it out of his
head.”

“God help them,” said the curate; “and let us be on the look-out to see
what comes of all these absurdities of the knight and squire, for it
seems as if they had both been cast in the same mould, and the madness
of the master without the simplicity of the man would not be worth a
farthing.”

“That is true,” said the barber, “and I should like very much to know
what the pair are talking about at this moment.”

“I promise you,” said the curate, “the niece or the housekeeper will
tell us by-and-by, for they are not the ones to forget to listen.”

Meanwhile Don Quixote shut himself up in his room with Sancho, and when
they were alone he said to him, “It grieves me greatly, Sancho, that
thou shouldst have said, and sayest, that I took thee out of thy
cottage, when thou knowest I did not remain in my house. We sallied
forth together, we took the road together, we wandered abroad together;
we have had the same fortune and the same luck; if they blanketed thee
once, they belaboured me a hundred times, and that is the only
advantage I have of thee.”

“That was only reasonable,” replied Sancho, “for, by what your worship
says, misfortunes belong more properly to knights-errant than to their
squires.”

“Thou art mistaken, Sancho,” said Don Quixote, “according to the maxim
_quando caput dolet_, etc.”

“I don’t understand any language but my own,” said Sancho.

“I mean to say,” said Don Quixote, “that when the head suffers all the
members suffer; and so, being thy lord and master, I am thy head, and
thou a part of me as thou art my servant; and therefore any evil that
affects or shall affect me should give thee pain, and what affects thee
give pain to me.”

“It should be so,” said Sancho; “but when I was blanketed as a member,
my head was on the other side of the wall, looking on while I was
flying through the air, and did not feel any pain whatever; and if the
members are obliged to feel the suffering of the head, it should be
obliged to feel their sufferings.”

“Dost thou mean to say now, Sancho,” said Don Quixote, “that I did not
feel when they were blanketing thee? If thou dost, thou must not say so
or think so, for I felt more pain then in spirit than thou didst in
body. But let us put that aside for the present, for we shall have
opportunities enough for considering and settling the point; tell me,
Sancho my friend, what do they say about me in the village here? What
do the common people think of me? What do the hidalgos? What do the
caballeros? What do they say of my valour; of my achievements; of my
courtesy? How do they treat the task I have undertaken in reviving and
restoring to the world the now forgotten order of chivalry? In short,
Sancho, I would have thee tell me all that has come to thine ears on
this subject; and thou art to tell me, without adding anything to the
good or taking away anything from the bad; for it is the duty of loyal
vassals to tell the truth to their lords just as it is and in its
proper shape, not allowing flattery to add to it or any idle deference
to lessen it. And I would have thee know, Sancho, that if the naked
truth, undisguised by flattery, came to the ears of princes, times
would be different, and other ages would be reckoned iron