ing to and with what
object; and if he swears truly, he shall be allowed to pass, but if
falsely, he shall be put to death for it by hanging on the gallows
erected there, without any remission.’ Though the law and its severe
penalty were known, many persons crossed, but in their declarations it
was easy to see at once they were telling the truth, and the judges let
them pass free. It happened, however, that one man, when they came to
take his declaration, swore and said that by the oath he took he was
going to die upon that gallows that stood there, and nothing else. The
judges held a consultation over the oath, and they said, ‘If we let
this man pass free he has sworn falsely, and by the law he ought to
die; but if we hang him, as he swore he was going to die on that
gallows, and therefore swore the truth, by the same law he ought to go
free.’ It is asked of your worship, señor governor, what are the judges
to do with this man? For they are still in doubt and perplexity; and
having heard of your worship’s acute and exalted intellect, they have
sent me to entreat your worship on their behalf to give your opinion on
this very intricate and puzzling case.”

To this Sancho made answer, “Indeed those gentlemen the judges that
send you to me might have spared themselves the trouble, for I have
more of the obtuse than the acute in me; but repeat the case over
again, so that I may understand it, and then perhaps I may be able to
hit the point.”

The querist repeated again and again what he had said before, and then
Sancho said, “It seems to me I can set the matter right in a moment,
and in this way; the man swears that he is going to die upon the
gallows; but if he dies upon it, he has sworn the truth, and by the law
enacted deserves to go free and pass over the bridge; but if they don’t
hang him, then he has sworn falsely, and by the same law deserves to be
hanged.”

“It is as the señor governor says,” said the messenger; “and as regards
a complete comprehension of the case, there is nothing left to desire
or hesitate about.”

“Well then I say,” said Sancho, “that of this man they should let pass
the part that has sworn truly, and hang the part that has lied; and in
this way the conditions of the passage will be fully complied with.”

“But then, señor governor,” replied the querist, “the man will have to
be divided into two parts; and if he is divided of course he will die;
and so none of the requirements of the law will be carried out, and it
is absolutely necessary to comply with it.”

“Look here, my good sir,” said Sancho; “either I’m a numskull or else
there is the same reason for this passenger dying as for his living and
passing over the bridge; for if the truth saves him the falsehood
equally condemns him; and that being the case it is my opinion you
should say to the gentlemen who sent you to me that as the arguments
for condemning him and for absolving him are exactly balanced, they
should let him pass freely, as it is always more praiseworthy to do
good than to do evil; this I would give signed with my name if I knew
how to sign; and what I have said in this case is not out of my own
head, but one of the many precepts my master Don Quixote gave me the
night before I left to become governor of this island, that came into
my mind, and it was this, that when there was any doubt about the
justice of a case I should lean to mercy; and it is God’s will that I
should recollect it now, for it fits this case as if it was made for
it.”

“That is true,” said the majordomo; “and I maintain that Lycurgus
himself, who gave laws to the Lacedemonians, could not have pronounced
a better decision than the great Panza has given; let the morning’s
audience close with this, and I will see that the señor governor has
dinner entirely to his liking.”

“That’s all I ask for—fair play,” said Sancho; “give me my dinner, and
then let it rain cases and questions on me, and I’ll despa