rnment.”

Sancho at last set out attended by a great number of people. He was
dressed in the garb of a lawyer, with a gaban of tawny watered camlet
over all and a montera cap of the same material, and mounted a la
gineta upon a mule. Behind him, in accordance with the duke’s orders,
followed Dapple with brand new ass-trappings and ornaments of silk, and
from time to time Sancho turned round to look at his ass, so well
pleased to have him with him that he would not have changed places with
the emperor of Germany. On taking leave he kissed the hands of the duke
and duchess and got his master’s blessing, which Don Quixote gave him
with tears, and he received blubbering.



p44b.jpg (341K)

Full Size



Let worthy Sancho go in peace, and good luck to him, Gentle Reader; and
look out for two bushels of laughter, which the account of how he
behaved himself in office will give thee. In the meantime turn thy
attention to what happened his master the same night, and if thou dost
not laugh thereat, at any rate thou wilt stretch thy mouth with a grin;
for Don Quixote’s adventures must be honoured either with wonder or
with laughter.

It is recorded, then, that as soon as Sancho had gone, Don Quixote felt
his loneliness, and had it been possible for him to revoke the mandate
and take away the government from him he would have done so. The
duchess observed his dejection and asked him why he was melancholy;
because, she said, if it was for the loss of Sancho, there were
squires, duennas, and damsels in her house who would wait upon him to
his full satisfaction.

“The truth is, señora,” replied Don Quixote, “that I do feel the loss
of Sancho; but that is not the main cause of my looking sad; and of all
the offers your excellence makes me, I accept only the good-will with
which they are made, and as to the remainder I entreat of your
excellence to permit and allow me alone to wait upon myself in my
chamber.”

“Indeed, Señor Don Quixote,” said the duchess, “that must not be; four
of my damsels, as beautiful as flowers, shall wait upon you.”

“To me,” said Don Quixote, “they will not be flowers, but thorns to
pierce my heart. They, or anything like them, shall as soon enter my
chamber as fly. If your highness wishes to gratify me still further,
though I deserve it not, permit me to please myself, and wait upon
myself in my own room; for I place a barrier between my inclinations
and my virtue, and I do not wish to break this rule through the
generosity your highness is disposed to display towards me; and, in
short, I will sleep in my clothes, sooner than allow anyone to undress
me.”

“Say no more, Señor Don Quixote, say no more,” said the duchess; “I
assure you I will give orders that not even a fly, not to say a damsel,
shall enter your room. I am not the one to undermine the propriety of
Señor Don Quixote, for it strikes me that among his many virtues the
one that is pre-eminent is that of modesty. Your worship may undress
and dress in private and in your own way, as you please and when you
please, for there will be no one to hinder you; and in your chamber you
will find all the utensils requisite to supply the wants of one who
sleeps with his door locked, to the end that no natural needs compel
you to open it. May the great Dulcinea del Toboso live a thousand
years, and may her fame extend all over the surface of the globe, for
she deserves to be loved by a knight so valiant and so virtuous; and
may kind heaven infuse zeal into the heart of our governor Sancho Panza
to finish off his discipline speedily, so that the world may once more
enjoy the beauty of so grand a lady.”

To which Don Quixote replied, “Your highness has spoken like what you
are; from the mouth of a noble lady nothing bad can come; and Dulcinea
will be more fortunate, and better known to the world by the praise of
your highness than by all the eulogies the greatest orators on earth
could bestow upon