Distressed One to bandage his eyes very
carefully; but after having them bandaged he uncovered them again,
saying, “If my memory does not deceive me, I have read in Virgil of the
Palladium of Troy, a wooden horse the Greeks offered to the goddess
Pallas, which was big with armed knights, who were afterwards the
destruction of Troy; so it would be as well to see, first of all, what
Clavileño has in his stomach.”

“There is no occasion,” said the Distressed One; “I will be bail for
him, and I know that Malambruno has nothing tricky or treacherous about
him; you may mount without any fear, Señor Don Quixote; on my head be
it if any harm befalls you.”

Don Quixote thought that to say anything further with regard to his
safety would be putting his courage in an unfavourable light; and so,
without more words, he mounted Clavileño, and tried the peg, which
turned easily; and as he had no stirrups and his legs hung down, he
looked like nothing so much as a figure in some Roman triumph painted
or embroidered on a Flemish tapestry.

Much against the grain, and very slowly, Sancho proceeded to mount,
and, after settling himself as well as he could on the croup, found it
rather hard, and not at all soft, and asked the duke if it would be
possible to oblige him with a pad of some kind, or a cushion; even if
it were off the couch of his lady the duchess, or the bed of one of the
pages; as the haunches of that horse were more like marble than wood.
On this the Trifaldi observed that Clavileño would not bear any kind of
harness or trappings, and that his best plan would be to sit sideways
like a woman, as in that way he would not feel the hardness so much.

Sancho did so, and, bidding them farewell, allowed his eyes to be
bandaged, but immediately afterwards uncovered them again, and looking
tenderly and tearfully on those in the garden, bade them help him in
his present strait with plenty of Paternosters and Ave Marias, that God
might provide someone to say as many for them, whenever they found
themselves in a similar emergency.

At this Don Quixote exclaimed, “Art thou on the gallows, thief, or at
thy last moment, to use pitiful entreaties of that sort? Cowardly,
spiritless creature, art thou not in the very place the fair Magalona
occupied, and from which she descended, not into the grave, but to
become Queen of France; unless the histories lie? And I who am here
beside thee, may I not put myself on a par with the valiant Pierres,
who pressed this very spot that I now press? Cover thine eyes, cover
thine eyes, abject animal, and let not thy fear escape thy lips, at
least in my presence.”

“Blindfold me,” said Sancho; “as you won’t let me commend myself or be
commended to God, is it any wonder if I am afraid there is a region of
devils about here that will carry us off to Peralvillo?”

They were then blindfolded, and Don Quixote, finding himself settled to
his satisfaction, felt for the peg, and the instant he placed his
fingers on it, all the duennas and all who stood by lifted up their
voices exclaiming, “God guide thee, valiant knight! God be with thee,
intrepid squire! Now, now ye go cleaving the air more swiftly than an
arrow! Now ye begin to amaze and astonish all who are gazing at you
from the earth! Take care not to wobble about, valiant Sancho! Mind
thou fall not, for thy fall will be worse than that rash youth’s who
tried to steer the chariot of his father the Sun!”

As Sancho heard the voices, clinging tightly to his master and winding
his arms round him, he said, “Señor, how do they make out we are going
up so high, if their voices reach us here and they seem to be speaking
quite close to us?”

“Don’t mind that, Sancho,” said Don Quixote; “for as affairs of this
sort, and flights like this are out of the common course of things, you
can see and hear as much as you like a thousand leagues off; but don’t
squeeze me so tight or thou wilt upset me; and really I kno