ando gave thanks to Heaven for the favour
shown to him and for having been rescued from the intricate labyrinth
in which he had been brought so near the destruction of his good name
and of his soul; and in short everybody in the inn was full of
contentment and satisfaction at the happy issue of such a complicated
and hopeless business. The curate as a sensible man made sound
reflections upon the whole affair, and congratulated each upon his good
fortune; but the one that was in the highest spirits and good humour
was the landlady, because of the promise Cardenio and the curate had
given her to pay for all the losses and damage she had sustained
through Don Quixote’s means. Sancho, as has been already said, was the
only one who was distressed, unhappy, and dejected; and so with a long
face he went in to his master, who had just awoke, and said to him:

“Sir Rueful Countenance, your worship may as well sleep on as much as
you like, without troubling yourself about killing any giant or
restoring her kingdom to the princess; for that is all over and settled
now.”

“I should think it was,” replied Don Quixote, “for I have had the most
prodigious and stupendous battle with the giant that I ever remember
having had all the days of my life; and with one back-stroke—swish!—I
brought his head tumbling to the ground, and so much blood gushed forth
from him that it ran in rivulets over the earth like water.”

“Like red wine, your worship had better say,” replied Sancho; “for I
would have you know, if you don’t know it, that the dead giant is a
hacked wine-skin, and the blood four-and-twenty gallons of red wine
that it had in its belly, and the cut-off head is the bitch that bore
me; and the devil take it all.”

“What art thou talking about, fool?” said Don Quixote; “art thou in thy
senses?”

“Let your worship get up,” said Sancho, “and you will see the nice
business you have made of it, and what we have to pay; and you will see
the queen turned into a private lady called Dorothea, and other things
that will astonish you, if you understand them.”

“I shall not be surprised at anything of the kind,” returned Don
Quixote; “for if thou dost remember the last time we were here I told
thee that everything that happened here was a matter of enchantment,
and it would be no wonder if it were the same now.”

“I could believe all that,” replied Sancho, “if my blanketing was the
same sort of thing also; only it wasn’t, but real and genuine; for I
saw the landlord, who is here to-day, holding one end of the blanket
and jerking me up to the skies very neatly and smartly, and with as
much laughter as strength; and when it comes to be a case of knowing
people, I hold for my part, simple and sinner as I am, that there is no
enchantment about it at all, but a great deal of bruising and bad
luck.”

“Well, well, God will give a remedy,” said Don Quixote; “hand me my
clothes and let me go out, for I want to see these transformations and
things thou speakest of.”

Sancho fetched him his clothes; and while he was dressing, the curate
gave Don Fernando and the others present an account of Don Quixote’s
madness and of the stratagem they had made use of to withdraw him from
that Pena Pobre where he fancied himself stationed because of his
lady’s scorn. He described to them also nearly all the adventures that
Sancho had mentioned, at which they marvelled and laughed not a little,
thinking it, as all did, the strangest form of madness a crazy
intellect could be capable of. But now, the curate said, that the lady
Dorothea’s good fortune prevented her from proceeding with their
purpose, it would be necessary to devise or discover some other way of
getting him home.

Cardenio proposed to carry out the scheme they had begun, and suggested
that Luscinda would act and support Dorothea’s part sufficiently well.

“No,” said Don Fernando, “that must not be, for I want Dorothea to
follow out this idea of