iful, but at the same time I know I am not hideous;
and it is enough for an honest man not to be a monster to be an object
of love, if only he possesses the endowments of mind I have mentioned.”

While engaged in this discourse they were making their way through a
wood that lay beyond the road, when suddenly, without expecting
anything of the kind, Don Quixote found himself caught in some nets of
green cord stretched from one tree to another; and unable to conceive
what it could be, he said to Sancho, “Sancho, it strikes me this affair
of these nets will prove one of the strangest adventures imaginable.
May I die if the enchanters that persecute me are not trying to
entangle me in them and delay my journey, by way of revenge for my
obduracy towards Altisidora. Well then let me tell them that if these
nets, instead of being green cord, were made of the hardest diamonds,
or stronger than that wherewith the jealous god of blacksmiths enmeshed
Venus and Mars, I would break them as easily as if they were made of
rushes or cotton threads.” But just as he was about to press forward
and break through all, suddenly from among some trees two shepherdesses
of surpassing beauty presented themselves to his sight—or at least
damsels dressed like shepherdesses, save that their jerkins and sayas
were of fine brocade; that is to say, the sayas were rich farthingales
of gold embroidered tabby. Their hair, that in its golden brightness
vied with the beams of the sun itself, fell loose upon their shoulders
and was crowned with garlands twined with green laurel and red
everlasting; and their years to all appearance were not under fifteen
nor above eighteen.



p58b.jpg (452K)

Full Size



Such was the spectacle that filled Sancho with amazement, fascinated
Don Quixote, made the sun halt in his course to behold them, and held
all four in a strange silence. One of the shepherdesses, at length, was
the first to speak and said to Don Quixote, “Hold, sir knight, and do
not break these nets; for they are not spread here to do you any harm,
but only for our amusement; and as I know you will ask why they have
been put up, and who we are, I will tell you in a few words. In a
village some two leagues from this, where there are many people of
quality and rich gentlefolk, it was agreed upon by a number of friends
and relations to come with their wives, sons and daughters, neighbours,
friends and kinsmen, and make holiday in this spot, which is one of the
pleasantest in the whole neighbourhood, setting up a new pastoral
Arcadia among ourselves, we maidens dressing ourselves as shepherdesses
and the youths as shepherds. We have prepared two eclogues, one by the
famous poet Garcilasso, the other by the most excellent Camoens, in its
own Portuguese tongue, but we have not as yet acted them. Yesterday was
the first day of our coming here; we have a few of what they say are
called field-tents pitched among the trees on the bank of an ample
brook that fertilises all these meadows; last night we spread these
nets in the trees here to snare the silly little birds that startled by
the noise we make may fly into them. If you please to be our guest,
señor, you will be welcomed heartily and courteously, for here just now
neither care nor sorrow shall enter.”

She held her peace and said no more, and Don Quixote made answer, “Of a
truth, fairest lady, Actaeon when he unexpectedly beheld Diana bathing
in the stream could not have been more fascinated and wonderstruck than
I at the sight of your beauty. I commend your mode of entertainment,
and thank you for the kindness of your invitation; and if I can serve
you, you may command me with full confidence of being obeyed, for my
profession is none other than to show myself grateful, and ready to
serve persons of all conditions, but especially persons of quality such
as your appearance indicates; and if, instead of taking up, as they
probably do, but a small s