into the signature. I declare your worship is
indeed the very devil, and there is nothing you don’t know.”

“Everything is needed for the calling I follow,” said Don Quixote.

“Now then,” said Sancho, “let your worship put the order for the three
ass-colts on the other side, and sign it very plainly, that they may
recognise it at first sight.”

“With all my heart,” said Don Quixote, and as he had written it he read
it to this effect:

“Mistress Niece,—By this first of ass-colts please pay to Sancho Panza,
my squire, three of the five I left at home in your charge: said three
ass-colts to be paid and delivered for the same number received here in
hand, which upon this and upon his receipt shall be duly paid. Done in
the heart of the Sierra Morena, the twenty-seventh of August of this
present year.”


“That will do,” said Sancho; “now let your worship sign it.”

“There is no need to sign it,” said Don Quixote, “but merely to put my
flourish, which is the same as a signature, and enough for three asses,
or even three hundred.”

“I can trust your worship,” returned Sancho; “let me go and saddle
Rocinante, and be ready to give me your blessing, for I mean to go at
once without seeing the fooleries your worship is going to do; I’ll say
I saw you do so many that she will not want any more.”

“At any rate, Sancho,” said Don Quixote, “I should like—and there is
reason for it—I should like thee, I say, to see me stripped to the skin
and performing a dozen or two of insanities, which I can get done in
less than half an hour; for having seen them with thine own eyes, thou
canst then safely swear to the rest that thou wouldst add; and I
promise thee thou wilt not tell of as many as I mean to perform.”

“For the love of God, master mine,” said Sancho, “let me not see your
worship stripped, for it will sorely grieve me, and I shall not be able
to keep from tears, and my head aches so with all I shed last night for
Dapple, that I am not fit to begin any fresh weeping; but if it is your
worship’s pleasure that I should see some insanities, do them in your
clothes, short ones, and such as come readiest to hand; for I myself
want nothing of the sort, and, as I have said, it will be a saving of
time for my return, which will be with the news your worship desires
and deserves. If not, let the lady Dulcinea look to it; if she does not
answer reasonably, I swear as solemnly as I can that I will fetch a
fair answer out of her stomach with kicks and cuffs; for why should it
be borne that a knight-errant as famous as your worship should go mad
without rhyme or reason for a—? Her ladyship had best not drive me to
say it, for by God I will speak out and let off everything cheap, even
if it doesn’t sell: I am pretty good at that! she little knows me;
faith, if she knew me she’d be in awe of me.”

“In faith, Sancho,” said Don Quixote, “to all appearance thou art no
sounder in thy wits than I.”

“I am not so mad,” answered Sancho, “but I am more peppery; but apart
from all this, what has your worship to eat until I come back? Will you
sally out on the road like Cardenio to force it from the shepherds?”

“Let not that anxiety trouble thee,” replied Don Quixote, “for even if
I had it I should not eat anything but the herbs and the fruits which
this meadow and these trees may yield me; the beauty of this business
of mine lies in not eating, and in performing other mortifications.”

“Do you know what I am afraid of?” said Sancho upon this; “that I shall
not be able to find my way back to this spot where I am leaving you, it
is such an out-of-the-way place.”

“Observe the landmarks well,” said Don Quixote, “for I will try not to
go far from this neighbourhood, and I will even take care to mount the
highest of these rocks to see if I can discover thee returning;
however, not to miss me and lose thyself, the best plan will be to cut
some branches of the broom that is so abundant about here,