d as soon as
he beholds the knight, recognising him by his arms and the device on
his shield, he will as a matter of course say, ‘What ho! Forth all ye,
the knights of my court, to receive the flower of chivalry who cometh
hither!’ At which command all will issue forth, and he himself,
advancing half-way down the stairs, will embrace him closely, and
salute him, kissing him on the cheek, and will then lead him to the
queen’s chamber, where the knight will find her with the princess her
daughter, who will be one of the most beautiful and accomplished
damsels that could with the utmost pains be discovered anywhere in the
known world. Straightway it will come to pass that she will fix her
eyes upon the knight and he his upon her, and each will seem to the
other something more divine than human, and, without knowing how or why
they will be taken and entangled in the inextricable toils of love, and
sorely distressed in their hearts not to see any way of making their
pains and sufferings known by speech. Thence they will lead him, no
doubt, to some richly adorned chamber of the palace, where, having
removed his armour, they will bring him a rich mantle of scarlet
wherewith to robe himself, and if he looked noble in his armour he will
look still more so in a doublet. When night comes he will sup with the
king, queen, and princess; and all the time he will never take his eyes
off her, stealing stealthy glances, unnoticed by those present, and she
will do the same, and with equal cautiousness, being, as I have said, a
damsel of great discretion. The tables being removed, suddenly through
the door of the hall there will enter a hideous and diminutive dwarf
followed by a fair dame, between two giants, who comes with a certain
adventure, the work of an ancient sage; and he who shall achieve it
shall be deemed the best knight in the world.

“The king will then command all those present to essay it, and none
will bring it to an end and conclusion save the stranger knight, to the
great enhancement of his fame, whereat the princess will be overjoyed
and will esteem herself happy and fortunate in having fixed and placed
her thoughts so high. And the best of it is that this king, or prince,
or whatever he is, is engaged in a very bitter war with another as
powerful as himself, and the stranger knight, after having been some
days at his court, requests leave from him to go and serve him in the
said war. The king will grant it very readily, and the knight will
courteously kiss his hands for the favour done to him; and that night
he will take leave of his lady the princess at the grating of the
chamber where she sleeps, which looks upon a garden, and at which he
has already many times conversed with her, the go-between and
confidante in the matter being a damsel much trusted by the princess.
He will sigh, she will swoon, the damsel will fetch water, much
distressed because morning approaches, and for the honour of her lady
he would not that they were discovered; at last the princess will come
to herself and will present her white hands through the grating to the
knight, who will kiss them a thousand and a thousand times, bathing
them with his tears. It will be arranged between them how they are to
inform each other of their good or evil fortunes, and the princess will
entreat him to make his absence as short as possible, which he will
promise to do with many oaths; once more he kisses her hands, and takes
his leave in such grief that he is well-nigh ready to die. He betakes
him thence to his chamber, flings himself on his bed, cannot sleep for
sorrow at parting, rises early in the morning, goes to take leave of
the king, queen, and princess, and, as he takes his leave of the pair,
it is told him that the princess is indisposed and cannot receive a
visit; the knight thinks it is from grief at his departure, his heart
is pierced, and he is hardly able to keep from showing his pain. The
confi