
want it to cost him his life.” By this almost all the Christians were
on board, and the Moors, who were fainthearted, hearing their captain
speak in this way, were cowed, and without any one of them taking to
his arms (and indeed they had few or hardly any) they submitted without
saying a word to be bound by the Christians, who quickly secured them,
threatening them that if they raised any kind of outcry they would be
all put to the sword. This having been accomplished, and half of our
party being left to keep guard over them, the rest of us, again taking
the renegade as our guide, hastened towards Hadji Morato’s garden, and
as good luck would have it, on trying the gate it opened as easily as
if it had not been locked; and so, quite quietly and in silence, we
reached the house without being perceived by anybody. The lovely
Zoraida was watching for us at a window, and as soon as she perceived
that there were people there, she asked in a low voice if we were
“Nizarani,” as much as to say or ask if we were Christians. I answered
that we were, and begged her to come down. As soon as she recognised me
she did not delay an instant, but without answering a word came down
immediately, opened the door and presented herself before us all, so
beautiful and so richly attired that I cannot attempt to describe her.
The moment I saw her I took her hand and kissed it, and the renegade
and my two comrades did the same; and the rest, who knew nothing of the
circumstances, did as they saw us do, for it only seemed as if we were
returning thanks to her, and recognising her as the giver of our
liberty. The renegade asked her in the Morisco language if her father
was in the house. She replied that he was and that he was asleep.

“Then it will be necessary to waken him and take him with us,” said the
renegade, “and everything of value in this fair mansion.”

“Nay,” said she, “my father must not on any account be touched, and
there is nothing in the house except what I shall take, and that will
be quite enough to enrich and satisfy all of you; wait a little and you
shall see,” and so saying she went in, telling us she would return
immediately and bidding us keep quiet without making any noise.

I asked the renegade what had passed between them, and when he told me,
I declared that nothing should be done except in accordance with the
wishes of Zoraida, who now came back with a little trunk so full of
gold crowns that she could scarcely carry it. Unfortunately her father
awoke while this was going on, and hearing a noise in the garden, came
to the window, and at once perceiving that all those who were there
were Christians, raising a prodigiously loud outcry, he began to call
out in Arabic, “Christians, Christians! thieves, thieves!” by which
cries we were all thrown into the greatest fear and embarrassment; but
the renegade seeing the danger we were in and how important it was for
him to effect his purpose before we were heard, mounted with the utmost
quickness to where Hadji Morato was, and with him went some of our
party; I, however, did not dare to leave Zoraida, who had fallen almost
fainting in my arms. To be brief, those who had gone upstairs acted so
promptly that in an instant they came down, carrying Hadji Morato with
his hands bound and a napkin tied over his mouth, which prevented him
from uttering a word, warning him at the same time that to attempt to
speak would cost him his life. When his daughter caught sight of him
she covered her eyes so as not to see him, and her father was
horror-stricken, not knowing how willingly she had placed herself in
our hands. But it was now most essential for us to be on the move, and
carefully and quickly we regained the vessel, where those who had
remained on board were waiting for us in apprehension of some mishap
having befallen us. It was barely two hours after night set in when we
were all on board the vessel, where the cords were removed 