oom, he made several cuts at
them. They dashed at the grating and escaped by it, save one that,
finding itself hard pressed by the slashes of Don Quixote’s sword, flew
at his face and held on to his nose tooth and nail, with the pain of
which he began to shout his loudest. The duke and duchess hearing this,
and guessing what it was, ran with all haste to his room, and as the
poor gentleman was striving with all his might to detach the cat from
his face, they opened the door with a master-key and went in with
lights and witnessed the unequal combat. The duke ran forward to part
the combatants, but Don Quixote cried out aloud, “Let no one take him
from me; leave me hand to hand with this demon, this wizard, this
enchanter; I will teach him, I myself, who Don Quixote of La Mancha
is.” The cat, however, never minding these threats, snarled and held
on; but at last the duke pulled it off and flung it out of the window.
Don Quixote was left with a face as full of holes as a sieve and a nose
not in very good condition, and greatly vexed that they did not let him
finish the battle he had been so stoutly fighting with that villain of
an enchanter. They sent for some oil of John’s wort, and Altisidora
herself with her own fair hands bandaged all the wounded parts; and as
she did so she said to him in a low voice. “All these mishaps have
befallen thee, hardhearted knight, for the sin of thy insensibility and
obstinacy; and God grant thy squire Sancho may forget to whip himself,
so that that dearly beloved Dulcinea of thine may never be released
from her enchantment, that thou mayest never come to her bed, at least
while I who adore thee am alive.”

To all this Don Quixote made no answer except to heave deep sighs, and
then stretched himself on his bed, thanking the duke and duchess for
their kindness, not because he stood in any fear of that bell-ringing
rabble of enchanters in cat shape, but because he recognised their good
intentions in coming to his rescue. The duke and duchess left him to
repose and withdrew greatly grieved at the unfortunate result of the
joke; as they never thought the adventure would have fallen so heavy on
Don Quixote or cost him so dear, for it cost him five days of
confinement to his bed, during which he had another adventure,
pleasanter than the late one, which his chronicler will not relate just
now in order that he may turn his attention to Sancho Panza, who was
proceeding with great diligence and drollery in his government.



p46e.jpg (65K)



CHAPTER XLVII.
WHEREIN IS CONTINUED THE ACCOUNT OF HOW SANCHO PANZA CONDUCTED HIMSELF
IN HIS GOVERNMENT




p47a.jpg (139K)

Full Size



The history says that from the justice court they carried Sancho to a
sumptuous palace, where in a spacious chamber there was a table laid
out with royal magnificence. The clarions sounded as Sancho entered the
room, and four pages came forward to present him with water for his
hands, which Sancho received with great dignity. The music ceased, and
Sancho seated himself at the head of the table, for there was only that
seat placed, and no more than one cover laid. A personage, who it
appeared afterwards was a physician, placed himself standing by his
side with a whalebone wand in his hand. They then lifted up a fine
white cloth covering fruit and a great variety of dishes of different
sorts; one who looked like a student said grace, and a page put a laced
bib on Sancho, while another who played the part of head carver placed
a dish of fruit before him. But hardly had he tasted a morsel when the
man with the wand touched the plate with it, and they took it away from
before him with the utmost celerity. The carver, however, brought him
another dish, and Sancho proceeded to try it; but before he could get
at it, not to say taste it, already the wand had touched it and a page
had carried it off with the same promptitude as the fruit. Sancho
seeing this was puzzl