it was that stole Dapple
from Sancho Panza; which, because by the fault of the printers neither
the how nor the when was stated in the First Part, has been a puzzle to
a good many people, who attribute to the bad memory of the author what
was the error of the press. In fact, however, Gines stole him while
Sancho Panza was asleep on his back, adopting the plan and device that
Brunello had recourse to when he stole Sacripante’s horse from between
his legs at the siege of Albracca; and, as has been told, Sancho
afterwards recovered him. This Gines, then, afraid of being caught by
the officers of justice, who were looking for him to punish him for his
numberless rascalities and offences (which were so many and so great
that he himself wrote a big book giving an account of them), resolved
to shift his quarters into the kingdom of Aragon, and cover up his left
eye, and take up the trade of a puppet-showman; for this, as well as
juggling, he knew how to practise to perfection. From some released
Christians returning from Barbary, it so happened, he bought the ape,
which he taught to mount upon his shoulder on his making a certain
sign, and to whisper, or seem to do so, in his ear. Thus prepared,
before entering any village whither he was bound with his show and his
ape, he used to inform himself at the nearest village, or from the most
likely person he could find, as to what particular things had happened
there, and to whom; and bearing them well in mind, the first thing he
did was to exhibit his show, sometimes one story, sometimes another,
but all lively, amusing, and familiar. As soon as the exhibition was
over he brought forward the accomplishments of his ape, assuring the
public that he divined all the past and the present, but as to the
future he had no skill. For each question answered he asked two reals,
and for some he made a reduction, just as he happened to feel the pulse
of the questioners; and when now and then he came to houses where
things that he knew of had happened to the people living there, even if
they did not ask him a question, not caring to pay for it, he would
make the sign to the ape and then declare that it had said so and so,
which fitted the case exactly. In this way he acquired a prodigious
name and all ran after him; on other occasions, being very crafty, he
would answer in such a way that the answers suited the questions; and
as no one cross-questioned him or pressed him to tell how his ape
divined, he made fools of them all and filled his pouch. The instant he
entered the inn he knew Don Quixote and Sancho, and with that knowledge
it was easy for him to astonish them and all who were there; but it
would have cost him dear had Don Quixote brought down his hand a little
lower when he cut off King Marsilio’s head and destroyed all his
horsemen, as related in the preceeding chapter.

So much for Master Pedro and his ape; and now to return to Don Quixote
of La Mancha. After he had left the inn he determined to visit, first
of all, the banks of the Ebro and that neighbourhood, before entering
the city of Saragossa, for the ample time there was still to spare
before the jousts left him enough for all. With this object in view he
followed the road and travelled along it for two days, without meeting
any adventure worth committing to writing until on the third day, as he
was ascending a hill, he heard a great noise of drums, trumpets, and
musket-shots. At first he imagined some regiment of soldiers was
passing that way, and to see them he spurred Rocinante and mounted the
hill. On reaching the top he saw at the foot of it over two hundred
men, as it seemed to him, armed with weapons of various sorts, lances,
crossbows, partisans, halberds, and pikes, and a few muskets and a
great many bucklers. He descended the slope and approached the band
near enough to see distinctly the flags, make out the colours and
distinguish the devices they bore, especially on