to carry
away the treasure that I left buried, which, as it is outside the town,
I shall be able to do without risk, and to write, or cross over from
Valencia, to my daughter and wife, who I know are at Algiers, and find
some means of bringing them to some French port and thence to Germany,
there to await what it may be God’s will to do with us; for, after all,
Sancho, I know well that Ricota my daughter and Francisca Ricota my
wife are Catholic Christians, and though I am not so much so, still I
am more of a Christian than a Moor, and it is always my prayer to God
that he will open the eyes of my understanding and show me how I am to
serve him; but what amazes me and I cannot understand is why my wife
and daughter should have gone to Barbary rather than to France, where
they could live as Christians.”

To this Sancho replied, “Remember, Ricote, that may not have been open
to them, for Juan Tiopieyo thy wife’s brother took them, and being a
true Moor he went where he could go most easily; and another thing I
can tell thee, it is my belief thou art going in vain to look for what
thou hast left buried, for we heard they took from thy brother-in-law
and thy wife a great quantity of pearls and money in gold which they
brought to be passed.”

“That may be,” said Ricote; “but I know they did not touch my hoard,
for I did not tell them where it was, for fear of accidents; and so, if
thou wilt come with me, Sancho, and help me to take it away and conceal
it, I will give thee two hundred crowns wherewith thou mayest relieve
thy necessities, and, as thou knowest, I know they are many.”

“I would do it,” said Sancho; “but I am not at all covetous, for I gave
up an office this morning in which, if I was, I might have made the
walls of my house of gold and dined off silver plates before six months
were over; and so for this reason, and because I feel I would be guilty
of treason to my king if I helped his enemies, I would not go with thee
if instead of promising me two hundred crowns thou wert to give me four
hundred here in hand.”

“And what office is this thou hast given up, Sancho?” asked Ricote.

“I have given up being governor of an island,” said Sancho, “and such a
one, faith, as you won’t find the like of easily.”

“And where is this island?” said Ricote.

“Where?” said Sancho; “two leagues from here, and it is called the
island of Barataria.”

“Nonsense! Sancho,” said Ricote; “islands are away out in the sea;
there are no islands on the mainland.”

“What? No islands!” said Sancho; “I tell thee, friend Ricote, I left it
this morning, and yesterday I was governing there as I pleased like a
sagittarius; but for all that I gave it up, for it seemed to me a
dangerous office, a governor’s.”

“And what hast thou gained by the government?” asked Ricote.

“I have gained,” said Sancho, “the knowledge that I am no good for
governing, unless it is a drove of cattle, and that the riches that are
to be got by these governments are got at the cost of one’s rest and
sleep, ay and even one’s food; for in islands the governors must eat
little, especially if they have doctors to look after their health.”

“I don’t understand thee, Sancho,” said Ricote; “but it seems to me all
nonsense thou art talking. Who would give thee islands to govern? Is
there any scarcity in the world of cleverer men than thou art for
governors? Hold thy peace, Sancho, and come back to thy senses, and
consider whether thou wilt come with me as I said to help me to take
away treasure I left buried (for indeed it may be called a treasure, it
is so large), and I will give thee wherewithal to keep thee, as I told
thee.”

“And I have told thee already, Ricote, that I will not,” said Sancho;
“let it content thee that by me thou shalt not be betrayed, and go thy
way in God’s name and let me go mine; for I know that well-gotten gain
may be lost, but ill-gotten gain is lost, itself and its owner
likewise.”

“I