ight and
anxiety to make his acquaintance, meaning to fall in with his humour
and agree with everything he said, and, so long as he stayed with them,
to treat him as a knight-errant, with all the ceremonies usual in the
books of chivalry they had read, for they themselves were very fond of
them.

Don Quixote now came up with his visor raised, and as he seemed about
to dismount Sancho made haste to go and hold his stirrup for him; but
in getting down off Dapple he was so unlucky as to hitch his foot in
one of the ropes of the pack-saddle in such a way that he was unable to
free it, and was left hanging by it with his face and breast on the
ground. Don Quixote, who was not used to dismount without having the
stirrup held, fancying that Sancho had by this time come to hold it for
him, threw himself off with a lurch and brought Rocinante’s saddle
after him, which was no doubt badly girthed, and saddle and he both
came to the ground; not without discomfiture to him and abundant curses
muttered between his teeth against the unlucky Sancho, who had his foot
still in the shackles. The duke ordered his huntsmen to go to the help
of knight and squire, and they raised Don Quixote, sorely shaken by his
fall; and he, limping, advanced as best he could to kneel before the
noble pair. This, however, the duke would by no means permit; on the
contrary, dismounting from his horse, he went and embraced Don Quixote,
saying, “I am grieved, Sir Knight of the Rueful Countenance, that your
first experience on my ground should have been such an unfortunate one
as we have seen; but the carelessness of squires is often the cause of
worse accidents.”

“That which has happened me in meeting you, mighty prince,” replied Don
Quixote, “cannot be unfortunate, even if my fall had not stopped short
of the depths of the bottomless pit, for the glory of having seen you
would have lifted me up and delivered me from it. My squire, God’s
curse upon him, is better at unloosing his tongue in talking
impertinence than in tightening the girths of a saddle to keep it
steady; but however I may be, fallen or raised up, on foot or on
horseback, I shall always be at your service and that of my lady the
duchess, your worthy consort, worthy queen of beauty and paramount
princess of courtesy.”

“Gently, Señor Don Quixote of La Mancha,” said the duke; “where my lady
Doña Dulcinea del Toboso is, it is not right that other beauties should
be praised.”

Sancho, by this time released from his entanglement, was standing by,
and before his master could answer he said, “There is no denying, and
it must be maintained, that my lady Dulcinea del Toboso is very
beautiful; but the hare jumps up where one least expects it; and I have
heard say that what we call nature is like a potter that makes vessels
of clay, and he who makes one fair vessel can as well make two, or
three, or a hundred; I say so because, by my faith, my lady the duchess
is in no way behind my mistress the lady Dulcinea del Toboso.”

Don Quixote turned to the duchess and said, “Your highness may conceive
that never had knight-errant in this world a more talkative or a
droller squire than I have, and he will prove the truth of what I say,
if your highness is pleased to accept of my services for a few days.”

To which the duchess made answer, “that worthy Sancho is droll I
consider a very good thing, because it is a sign that he is shrewd; for
drollery and sprightliness, Señor Don Quixote, as you very well know,
do not take up their abode with dull wits; and as good Sancho is droll
and sprightly I here set him down as shrewd.”

“And talkative,” added Don Quixote.

“So much the better,” said the duke, “for many droll things cannot be
said in few words; but not to lose time in talking, come, great Knight
of the Rueful Countenance—”

“Of the Lions, your highness must say,” said Sancho, “for there is no
Rueful Countenance nor any such character now.”

“He of