r owners in
such elegant style? For God’s sake, Sancho, restrain thyself, and don’t
show the thread so as to let them see what a coarse, boorish texture
thou art of. Remember, sinner that thou art, the master is the more
esteemed the more respectable and well-bred his servants are; and that
one of the greatest advantages that princes have over other men is that
they have servants as good as themselves to wait on them. Dost thou not
see—shortsighted being that thou art, and unlucky mortal that I
am!—that if they perceive thee to be a coarse clown or a dull
blockhead, they will suspect me to be some impostor or swindler? Nay,
nay, Sancho friend, keep clear, oh, keep clear of these
stumbling-blocks; for he who falls into the way of being a chatterbox
and droll, drops into a wretched buffoon the first time he trips;
bridle thy tongue, consider and weigh thy words before they escape thy
mouth, and bear in mind we are now in quarters whence, by God’s help,
and the strength of my arm, we shall come forth mightily advanced in
fame and fortune.”

Sancho promised him with much earnestness to keep his mouth shut, and
to bite off his tongue before he uttered a word that was not altogether
to the purpose and well considered, and told him he might make his mind
easy on that point, for it should never be discovered through him what
they were.

Don Quixote dressed himself, put on his baldric with his sword, threw
the scarlet mantle over his shoulders, placed on his head a montera of
green satin that the damsels had given him, and thus arrayed passed out
into the large room, where he found the damsels drawn up in double
file, the same number on each side, all with the appliances for washing
the hands, which they presented to him with profuse obeisances and
ceremonies. Then came twelve pages, together with the seneschal, to
lead him to dinner, as his hosts were already waiting for him. They
placed him in the midst of them, and with much pomp and stateliness
they conducted him into another room, where there was a sumptuous table
laid with but four covers. The duchess and the duke came out to the
door of the room to receive him, and with them a grave ecclesiastic,
one of those who rule noblemen’s houses; one of those who, not being
born magnates themselves, never know how to teach those who are how to
behave as such; one of those who would have the greatness of great folk
measured by their own narrowness of mind; one of those who, when they
try to introduce economy into the household they rule, lead it into
meanness. One of this sort, I say, must have been the grave churchman
who came out with the duke and duchess to receive Don Quixote.

A vast number of polite speeches were exchanged, and at length, taking
Don Quixote between them, they proceeded to sit down to table. The duke
pressed Don Quixote to take the head of the table, and, though he
refused, the entreaties of the duke were so urgent that he had to
accept it.

The ecclesiastic took his seat opposite to him, and the duke and
duchess those at the sides. All this time Sancho stood by, gaping with
amazement at the honour he saw shown to his master by these illustrious
persons; and observing all the ceremonious pressing that had passed
between the duke and Don Quixote to induce him to take his seat at the
head of the table, he said, “If your worship will give me leave I will
tell you a story of what happened in my village about this matter of
seats.”

The moment Sancho said this Don Quixote trembled, making sure that he
was about to say something foolish. Sancho glanced at him, and guessing
his thoughts, said, “Don’t be afraid of my going astray, señor, or
saying anything that won’t be pat to the purpose; I haven’t forgotten
the advice your worship gave me just now about talking much or little,
well or ill.”

“I have no recollection of anything, Sancho,” said Don Quixote; “say
what thou wilt, only say it quickly.”

“Well th