 had been lent him; but that he had with his own hand
given them back into the hand of the other, and that he, not
recollecting it, was always asking for them.

Seeing this the great governor asked the creditor what answer he had to
make to what his opponent said. He said that no doubt his debtor had
told the truth, for he believed him to be an honest man and a good
Christian, and he himself must have forgotten when and how he had given
him back the crowns; and that from that time forth he would make no
further demand upon him.

The debtor took his stick again, and bowing his head left the court.
Observing this, and how, without another word, he made off, and
observing too the resignation of the plaintiff, Sancho buried his head
in his bosom and remained for a short space in deep thought, with the
forefinger of his right hand on his brow and nose; then he raised his
head and bade them call back the old man with the stick, for he had
already taken his departure. They brought him back, and as soon as
Sancho saw him he said, “Honest man, give me that stick, for I want
it.”

“Willingly,” said the old man; “here it is señor,” and he put it into
his hand.

Sancho took it and, handing it to the other old man, said to him, “Go,
and God be with you; for now you are paid.”

“I, señor!” returned the old man; “why, is this cane worth ten
gold-crowns?”

“Yes,” said the governor, “or if not I am the greatest dolt in the
world; now you will see whether I have got the headpiece to govern a
whole kingdom;” and he ordered the cane to be broken in two, there, in
the presence of all. It was done, and in the middle of it they found
ten gold-crowns. All were filled with amazement, and looked upon their
governor as another Solomon. They asked him how he had come to the
conclusion that the ten crowns were in the cane; he replied, that
observing how the old man who swore gave the stick to his opponent
while he was taking the oath, and swore that he had really and truly
given him the crowns, and how as soon as he had done swearing he asked
for the stick again, it came into his head that the sum demanded must
be inside it; and from this he said it might be seen that God sometimes
guides those who govern in their judgments, even though they may be
fools; besides he had himself heard the curate of his village mention
just such another case, and he had so good a memory, that if it was not
that he forgot everything he wished to remember, there would not be
such a memory in all the island. To conclude, the old men went off, one
crestfallen, and the other in high contentment, all who were present
were astonished, and he who was recording the words, deeds, and
movements of Sancho could not make up his mind whether he was to look
upon him and set him down as a fool or as a man of sense.

As soon as this case was disposed of, there came into court a woman
holding on with a tight grip to a man dressed like a well-to-do cattle
dealer, and she came forward making a great outcry and exclaiming,
“Justice, señor governor, justice! and if I don’t get it on earth I’ll
go look for it in heaven. Señor governor of my soul, this wicked man
caught me in the middle of the fields here and used my body as if it
was an ill-washed rag, and, woe is me! got from me what I had kept
these three-and-twenty years and more, defending it against Moors and
Christians, natives and strangers; and I always as hard as an oak, and
keeping myself as pure as a salamander in the fire, or wool among the
brambles, for this good fellow to come now with clean hands to handle
me!”

“It remains to be proved whether this gallant has clean hands or not,”
said Sancho; and turning to the man he asked him what he had to say in
answer to the woman’s charge.

He all in confusion made answer, “Sirs, I am a poor pig dealer, and
this morning I left the village to sell (saving your presence) four
pigs, and between dues and cribbings they got o