e got with child by his promises, and
that island you long so much for found its way into your head.”

“I am not with child by anyone,” returned Sancho, “nor am I a man to
let myself be got with child, if it was by the King himself. Though I
am poor I am an old Christian, and I owe nothing to nobody, and if I
long for an island, other people long for worse. Each of us is the son
of his own works; and being a man I may come to be pope, not to say
governor of an island, especially as my master may win so many that he
will not know whom to give them to. Mind how you talk, master barber;
for shaving is not everything, and there is some difference between
Peter and Peter. I say this because we all know one another, and it
will not do to throw false dice with me; and as to the enchantment of
my master, God knows the truth; leave it as it is; it only makes it
worse to stir it.”

The barber did not care to answer Sancho lest by his plain speaking he
should disclose what the curate and he himself were trying so hard to
conceal; and under the same apprehension the curate had asked the canon
to ride on a little in advance, so that he might tell him the mystery
of this man in the cage, and other things that would amuse him. The
canon agreed, and going on ahead with his servants, listened with
attention to the account of the character, life, madness, and ways of
Don Quixote, given him by the curate, who described to him briefly the
beginning and origin of his craze, and told him the whole story of his
adventures up to his being confined in the cage, together with the plan
they had of taking him home to try if by any means they could discover
a cure for his madness. The canon and his servants were surprised anew
when they heard Don Quixote’s strange story, and when it was finished
he said, “To tell the truth, señor curate, I for my part consider what
they call books of chivalry to be mischievous to the State; and though,
led by idle and false taste, I have read the beginnings of almost all
that have been printed, I never could manage to read any one of them
from beginning to end; for it seems to me they are all more or less the
same thing; and one has nothing more in it than another; this no more
than that. And in my opinion this sort of writing and composition is of
the same species as the fables they call the Milesian, nonsensical
tales that aim solely at giving amusement and not instruction, exactly
the opposite of the apologue fables which amuse and instruct at the
same time. And though it may be the chief object of such books to
amuse, I do not know how they can succeed, when they are so full of
such monstrous nonsense. For the enjoyment the mind feels must come
from the beauty and harmony which it perceives or contemplates in the
things that the eye or the imagination brings before it; and nothing
that has any ugliness or disproportion about it can give any pleasure.
What beauty, then, or what proportion of the parts to the whole, or of
the whole to the parts, can there be in a book or fable where a lad of
sixteen cuts down a giant as tall as a tower and makes two halves of
him as if he was an almond cake? And when they want to give us a
picture of a battle, after having told us that there are a million of
combatants on the side of the enemy, let the hero of the book be
opposed to them, and we have perforce to believe, whether we like it or
not, that the said knight wins the victory by the single might of his
strong arm. And then, what shall we say of the facility with which a
born queen or empress will give herself over into the arms of some
unknown wandering knight? What mind, that is not wholly barbarous and
uncultured, can find pleasure in reading of how a great tower full of
knights sails away across the sea like a ship with a fair wind, and
will be to-night in Lombardy and to-morrow morning in the land of
Prester John of the Indies, or some other that Ptolemy never descr