
the middle of the body—as is wont to happen frequently—but neatly and
with great nicety, ere the blood congeal, to place that portion of the
body which shall have fallen to the ground upon the other half which
remains in the saddle, taking care to fit it on evenly and exactly.
Then thou shalt give me to drink but two drops of the balsam I have
mentioned, and thou shalt see me become sounder than an apple.”

“If that be so,” said Panza, “I renounce henceforth the government of
the promised island, and desire nothing more in payment of my many and
faithful services than that your worship give me the receipt of this
supreme liquor, for I am persuaded it will be worth more than two reals
an ounce anywhere, and I want no more to pass the rest of my life in
ease and honour; but it remains to be told if it costs much to make
it.”

“With less than three reals, six quarts of it may be made,” said Don
Quixote.

“Sinner that I am!” said Sancho, “then why does your worship put off
making it and teaching it to me?”

“Peace, friend,” answered Don Quixote; “greater secrets I mean to teach
thee and greater favours to bestow upon thee; and for the present let
us see to the dressing, for my ear pains me more than I could wish.”

Sancho took out some lint and ointment from the alforjas; but when Don
Quixote came to see his helmet shattered, he was like to lose his
senses, and clapping his hand upon his sword and raising his eyes to
heaven, he said, “I swear by the Creator of all things and the four
Gospels in their fullest extent, to do as the great Marquis of Mantua
did when he swore to avenge the death of his nephew Baldwin (and that
was not to eat bread from a table-cloth, nor embrace his wife, and
other points which, though I cannot now call them to mind, I here grant
as expressed) until I take complete vengeance upon him who has
committed such an offence against me.”

Hearing this, Sancho said to him, “Your worship should bear in mind,
Señor Don Quixote, that if the knight has done what was commanded him
in going to present himself before my lady Dulcinea del Toboso, he will
have done all that he was bound to do, and does not deserve further
punishment unless he commits some new offence.”

“Thou hast said well and hit the point,” answered Don Quixote; and so I
recall the oath in so far as relates to taking fresh vengeance on him,
but I make and confirm it anew to lead the life I have said until such
time as I take by force from some knight another helmet such as this
and as good; and think not, Sancho, that I am raising smoke with straw
in doing so, for I have one to imitate in the matter, since the very
same thing to a hair happened in the case of Mambrino’s helmet, which
cost Sacripante so dear.”

“Señor,” replied Sancho, “let your worship send all such oaths to the
devil, for they are very pernicious to salvation and prejudicial to the
conscience; just tell me now, if for several days to come we fall in
with no man armed with a helmet, what are we to do? Is the oath to be
observed in spite of all the inconvenience and discomfort it will be to
sleep in your clothes, and not to sleep in a house, and a thousand
other mortifications contained in the oath of that old fool the Marquis
of Mantua, which your worship is now wanting to revive? Let your
worship observe that there are no men in armour travelling on any of
these roads, nothing but carriers and carters, who not only do not wear
helmets, but perhaps never heard tell of them all their lives.”

“Thou art wrong there,” said Don Quixote, “for we shall not have been
above two hours among these cross-roads before we see more men in
armour than came to Albraca to win the fair Angelica.”

“Enough,” said Sancho; “so be it then, and God grant us success, and
that the time for winning that island which is costing me so dear may
soon come, and then let me die.”

“I have already told thee, Sancho,” said Don Quixote, “not to giv