n crew.
If the fair Dulcinea, your heart’s queen,
    Be unrelenting in her cruelty,
        If still your woe be powerless to move her,
    In such hard case your comfort let it be
That Sancho was a sorry go-between:
        A booby he, hard-hearted she, and you no lover.




DIALOGUE
Between Babieca and Rocinante

SONNET

_B_. “How comes it, Rocinante, you’re so lean?”
_R_.     “I’m underfed, with overwork I’m worn.”
_B_.     “But what becomes of all the hay and corn?”
_R_. “My master gives me none; he’s much too mean.”
_B_. “Come, come, you show ill-breeding, sir, I ween;
    ’Tis like an ass your master thus to scorn.”
_R_.     He is an ass, will die an ass, an ass was born;
Why, he’s in love; what’s plainer to be seen?”
_B_. “To be in love is folly?”—_R_. “No great sense.”
_B_.     “You’re metaphysical.”—_R_. “From want of food.”
_B_.     “Rail at the squire, then.”—_R_. “Why, what’s the good?
    I might indeed complain of him, I grant ye,
But, squire or master, where’s the difference?
    They’re both as sorry hacks as Rocinante.”



p005.jpg (171K)

Full Size




DEDICATION OF PART I

TO THE DUKE OF BEJAR, MARQUIS OF GIBRALEON, COUNT OF BENALCAZAR AND
BANARES, VICECOUNT OF THE PUEBLA DE ALCOCER, MASTER OF THE TOWNS OF
CAPILLA, CURIEL AND BURGUILLOS




In belief of the good reception and honours that Your Excellency
bestows on all sort of books, as prince so inclined to favor good arts,
chiefly those who by their nobleness do not submit to the service and
bribery of the vulgar, I have determined bringing to light The
Ingenious Gentleman Don Quixote of la Mancha, in shelter of Your
Excellency’s glamorous name, to whom, with the obeisance I owe to such
grandeur, I pray to receive it agreeably under his protection, so that
in this shadow, though deprived of that precious ornament of elegance
and erudition that clothe the works composed in the houses of those who
know, it dares appear with assurance in the judgment of some who,
trespassing the bounds of their own ignorance, use to condemn with more
rigour and less justice the writings of others. It is my earnest hope
that Your Excellency’s good counsel in regard to my honourable purpose,
will not disdain the littleness of so humble a service.

Miguel de Cervantes



e00.jpg (24K)



CHAPTER I.
WHICH TREATS OF THE CHARACTER AND PURSUITS OF THE FAMOUS GENTLEMAN DON
QUIXOTE OF LA MANCHA




p007.jpg (150K)

Full Size

In a village of La Mancha, the name of which I have no desire to call
to mind, there lived not long since one of those gentlemen that keep a
lance in the lance-rack, an old buckler, a lean hack, and a greyhound
for coursing. An olla of rather more beef than mutton, a salad on most
nights, scraps on Saturdays, lentils on Fridays, and a pigeon or so
extra on Sundays, made away with three-quarters of his income. The rest
of it went in a doublet of fine cloth and velvet breeches and shoes to
match for holidays, while on week-days he made a brave figure in his
best homespun. He had in his house a housekeeper past forty, a niece
under twenty, and a lad for the field and market-place, who used to
saddle the hack as well as handle the bill-hook. The age of this
gentleman of ours was bordering on fifty; he was of a hardy habit,
spare, gaunt-featured, a very early riser and a great sportsman. They
will have it his surname was Quixada or Quesada (for here there is some
difference of opinion among the authors who write on the subject),
although from reasonable conjectures it seems plain that he was called
Quexana. This, however, is of but little importance to our tale; it
will be enough not to stray a hair’s breadth from the truth in the
telling of it.

You must know, then, that the above-named gentleman whenever he was at
leisure (which was mostly all the year round) gave himself up to
reading books of chivalry with such ardour and avidity that he almost
entirely negle