e this mishap occurred, was long
ago; but the question is of no great importance, nor does it affect or
make any alteration in the truth or substance of the story.”

“That is true,” said the cousin; “continue, Señor Don Quixote, for I am
listening to you with the greatest pleasure in the world.”

“And with no less do I tell the tale,” said Don Quixote; “and so, to
proceed—the venerable Montesinos led me into the palace of crystal,
where, in a lower chamber, strangely cool and entirely of alabaster,
was an elaborately wrought marble tomb, upon which I beheld, stretched
at full length, a knight, not of bronze, or marble, or jasper, as are
seen on other tombs, but of actual flesh and bone. His right hand
(which seemed to me somewhat hairy and sinewy, a sign of great strength
in its owner) lay on the side of his heart; but before I could put any
question to Montesinos, he, seeing me gazing at the tomb in amazement,
said to me, ‘This is my friend Durandarte, flower and mirror of the
true lovers and valiant knights of his time. He is held enchanted here,
as I myself and many others are, by that French enchanter Merlin, who,
they say, was the devil’s son; but my belief is, not that he was the
devil’s son, but that he knew, as the saying is, a point more than the
devil. How or why he enchanted us, no one knows, but time will tell,
and I suspect that time is not far off. What I marvel at is, that I
know it to be as sure as that it is now day, that Durandarte ended his
life in my arms, and that, after his death, I took out his heart with
my own hands; and indeed it must have weighed more than two pounds,
for, according to naturalists, he who has a large heart is more largely
endowed with valour than he who has a small one. Then, as this is the
case, and as the knight did really die, how comes it that he now moans
and sighs from time to time, as if he were still alive?’



p23b.jpg (243K)

Full Size



“As he said this, the wretched Durandarte cried out in a loud voice:

O cousin Montesinos!
’Twas my last request of thee,
When my soul hath left the body,
And that lying dead I be,
With thy poniard or thy dagger
Cut the heart from out my breast,
And bear it to Belerma.
This was my last request.”


“On hearing which, the venerable Montesinos fell on his knees before
the unhappy knight, and with tearful eyes exclaimed, ‘Long since, Señor
Durandarte, my beloved cousin, long since have I done what you bade me
on that sad day when I lost you; I took out your heart as well as I
could, not leaving an atom of it in your breast, I wiped it with a lace
handkerchief, and I took the road to France with it, having first laid
you in the bosom of the earth with tears enough to wash and cleanse my
hands of the blood that covered them after wandering among your bowels;
and more by token, O cousin of my soul, at the first village I came to
after leaving Roncesvalles, I sprinkled a little salt upon your heart
to keep it sweet, and bring it, if not fresh, at least pickled, into
the presence of the lady Belerma, whom, together with you, myself,
Guadiana your squire, the duenna Ruidera and her seven daughters and
two nieces, and many more of your friends and acquaintances, the sage
Merlin has been keeping enchanted here these many years; and although
more than five hundred have gone by, not one of us has died; Ruidera
and her daughters and nieces alone are missing, and these, because of
the tears they shed, Merlin, out of the compassion he seems to have
felt for them, changed into so many lakes, which to this day in the
world of the living, and in the province of La Mancha, are called the
Lakes of Ruidera. The seven daughters belong to the kings of Spain and
the two nieces to the knights of a very holy order called the Order of
St. John. Guadiana your squire, likewise bewailing your fate, was
changed into a river of his own name, but when he came to the surface
and beheld the sun of anot