ghing at, Sancho?” said Don Quixote.

“I am laughing,” said he, “to think of the great head the pagan must
have had who owned this helmet, for it looks exactly like a regular
barber’s basin.”

“Dost thou know what I suspect, Sancho?” said Don Quixote; “that this
wonderful piece of this enchanted helmet must by some strange accident
have come into the hands of someone who was unable to recognise or
realise its value, and who, not knowing what he did, and seeing it to
be of the purest gold, must have melted down one half for the sake of
what it might be worth, and of the other made this which is like a
barber’s basin as thou sayest; but be it as it may, to me who recognise
it, its transformation makes no difference, for I will set it to rights
at the first village where there is a blacksmith, and in such style
that that helmet the god of smithies forged for the god of battles
shall not surpass it or even come up to it; and in the meantime I will
wear it as well as I can, for something is better than nothing; all the
more as it will be quite enough to protect me from any chance blow of a
stone.”

“That is,” said Sancho, “if it is not shot with a sling as they were in
the battle of the two armies, when they signed the cross on your
worship’s grinders and smashed the flask with that blessed draught that
made me vomit my bowels up.”

“It does not grieve me much to have lost it,” said Don Quixote, “for
thou knowest, Sancho, that I have the receipt in my memory.”

“So have I,” answered Sancho, “but if ever I make it, or try it again
as long as I live, may this be my last hour; moreover, I have no
intention of putting myself in the way of wanting it, for I mean, with
all my five senses, to keep myself from being wounded or from wounding
anyone: as to being blanketed again I say nothing, for it is hard to
prevent mishaps of that sort, and if they come there is nothing for it
but to squeeze our shoulders together, hold our breath, shut our eyes,
and let ourselves go where luck and the blanket may send us.”

“Thou art a bad Christian, Sancho,” said Don Quixote on hearing this,
“for once an injury has been done thee thou never forgettest it: but
know that it is the part of noble and generous hearts not to attach
importance to trifles. What lame leg hast thou got by it, what broken
rib, what cracked head, that thou canst not forget that jest? For jest
and sport it was, properly regarded, and had I not seen it in that
light I would have returned and done more mischief in revenging thee
than the Greeks did for the rape of Helen, who, if she were alive now,
or if my Dulcinea had lived then, might depend upon it she would not be
so famous for her beauty as she is;” and here he heaved a sigh and sent
it aloft; and said Sancho, “Let it pass for a jest as it cannot be
revenged in earnest, but I know what sort of jest and earnest it was,
and I know it will never be rubbed out of my memory any more than off
my shoulders. But putting that aside, will your worship tell me what
are we to do with this dapple-grey steed that looks like a grey ass,
which that Martino that your worship overthrew has left deserted here?
for, from the way he took to his heels and bolted, he is not likely
ever to come back for it; and by my beard but the grey is a good one.”

“I have never been in the habit,” said Don Quixote, “of taking spoil of
those whom I vanquish, nor is it the practice of chivalry to take away
their horses and leave them to go on foot, unless indeed it be that the
victor have lost his own in the combat, in which case it is lawful to
take that of the vanquished as a thing won in lawful war; therefore,
Sancho, leave this horse, or ass, or whatever thou wilt have it to be;
for when its owner sees us gone hence he will come back for it.”

“God knows I should like to take it,” returned Sancho, “or at least to
change it for my own, which does not seem to me as good a one: verily
the laws of ch