Talk of other dainties, if you please, and don’t ask for hens again.”

“Body o’ me!” said Sancho, “let’s settle the matter; say at once what
you have got, and let us have no more words about it.”

“In truth and earnest, señor guest,” said the landlord, “all I have is
a couple of cow-heels like calves’ feet, or a couple of calves’ feet
like cowheels; they are boiled with chick-peas, onions, and bacon, and
at this moment they are crying ‘Come eat me, come eat me.”

“I mark them for mine on the spot,” said Sancho; “let nobody touch
them; I’ll pay better for them than anyone else, for I could not wish
for anything more to my taste; and I don’t care a pin whether they are
feet or heels.”

“Nobody shall touch them,” said the landlord; “for the other guests I
have, being persons of high quality, bring their own cook and caterer
and larder with them.”

“If you come to people of quality,” said Sancho, “there’s nobody more
so than my master; but the calling he follows does not allow of larders
or store-rooms; we lay ourselves down in the middle of a meadow, and
fill ourselves with acorns or medlars.”

Here ended Sancho’s conversation with the landlord, Sancho not caring
to carry it any farther by answering him; for he had already asked him
what calling or what profession it was his master was of.

Supper-time having come, then, Don Quixote betook himself to his room,
the landlord brought in the stew-pan just as it was, and he sat himself
down to sup very resolutely. It seems that in another room, which was
next to Don Quixote’s, with nothing but a thin partition to separate
it, he overheard these words, “As you live, Señor Don Jeronimo, while
they are bringing supper, let us read another chapter of the Second
Part of ‘Don Quixote of La Mancha.’”

The instant Don Quixote heard his own name he started to his feet and
listened with open ears to catch what they said about him, and heard
the Don Jeronimo who had been addressed say in reply, “Why would you
have us read that absurd stuff, Don Juan, when it is impossible for
anyone who has read the First Part of the history of ‘Don Quixote of La
Mancha’ to take any pleasure in reading this Second Part?”

“For all that,” said he who was addressed as Don Juan, “we shall do
well to read it, for there is no book so bad but it has something good
in it. What displeases me most in it is that it represents Don Quixote
as now cured of his love for Dulcinea del Toboso.”

On hearing this Don Quixote, full of wrath and indignation, lifted up
his voice and said, “Whoever he may be who says that Don Quixote of La
Mancha has forgotten or can forget Dulcinea del Toboso, I will teach
him with equal arms that what he says is very far from the truth; for
neither can the peerless Dulcinea del Toboso be forgotten, nor can
forgetfulness have a place in Don Quixote; his motto is constancy, and
his profession to maintain the same with his life and never wrong it.”

“Who is this that answers us?” said they in the next room.

“Who should it be,” said Sancho, “but Don Quixote of La Mancha himself,
who will make good all he has said and all he will say; for pledges
don’t trouble a good payer.”

Sancho had hardly uttered these words when two gentlemen, for such they
seemed to be, entered the room, and one of them, throwing his arms
round Don Quixote’s neck, said to him, “Your appearance cannot leave
any question as to your name, nor can your name fail to identify your
appearance; unquestionably, señor, you are the real Don Quixote of La
Mancha, cynosure and morning star of knight-errantry, despite and in
defiance of him who has sought to usurp your name and bring to naught
your achievements, as the author of this book which I here present to
you has done;” and with this he put a book which his companion carried
into the hands of Don Quixote, who took it, and without replying began
to run his eye over it; but he presently returned it saying, “In the
li