e moons, which gave him an extremely gallant and splendid
appearance; above his helmet fluttered a great quantity of plumes,
green, yellow, and white, and his lance, which was leaning against a
tree, was very long and stout, and had a steel point more than a palm
in length.

Don Quixote observed all, and took note of all, and from what he saw
and observed he concluded that the said knight must be a man of great
strength, but he did not for all that give way to fear, like Sancho
Panza; on the contrary, with a composed and dauntless air, he said to
the Knight of the Mirrors, “If, sir knight, your great eagerness to
fight has not banished your courtesy, by it I would entreat you to
raise your visor a little, in order that I may see if the comeliness of
your countenance corresponds with that of your equipment.”

“Whether you come victorious or vanquished out of this emprise, sir
knight,” replied he of the Mirrors, “you will have more than enough
time and leisure to see me; and if now I do not comply with your
request, it is because it seems to me I should do a serious wrong to
the fair Casildea de Vandalia in wasting time while I stopped to raise
my visor before compelling you to confess what you are already aware I
maintain.”

“Well then,” said Don Quixote, “while we are mounting you can at least
tell me if I am that Don Quixote whom you said you vanquished.”

“To that we answer you,” said he of the Mirrors, “that you are as like
the very knight I vanquished as one egg is like another, but as you say
enchanters persecute you, I will not venture to say positively whether
you are the said person or not.”

“That,” said Don Quixote, “is enough to convince me that you are under
a deception; however, entirely to relieve you of it, let our horses be
brought, and in less time than it would take you to raise your visor,
if God, my lady, and my arm stand me in good stead, I shall see your
face, and you shall see that I am not the vanquished Don Quixote you
take me to be.”

With this, cutting short the colloquy, they mounted, and Don Quixote
wheeled Rocinante round in order to take a proper distance to charge
back upon his adversary, and he of the Mirrors did the same; but Don
Quixote had not moved away twenty paces when he heard himself called by
the other, and, each returning half-way, he of the Mirrors said to him,
“Remember, sir knight, that the terms of our combat are, that the
vanquished, as I said before, shall be at the victor’s disposal.”

“I am aware of it already,” said Don Quixote; “provided what is
commanded and imposed upon the vanquished be things that do not
transgress the limits of chivalry.”

“That is understood,” replied he of the Mirrors.

At this moment the extraordinary nose of the squire presented itself to
Don Quixote’s view, and he was no less amazed than Sancho at the sight;
insomuch that he set him down as a monster of some kind, or a human
being of some new species or unearthly breed. Sancho, seeing his master
retiring to run his course, did not like to be left alone with the nosy
man, fearing that with one flap of that nose on his own the battle
would be all over for him and he would be left stretched on the ground,
either by the blow or with fright; so he ran after his master, holding
on to Rocinante’s stirrup-leather, and when it seemed to him time to
turn about, he said, “I implore of your worship, señor, before you turn
to charge, to help me up into this cork tree, from which I will be able
to witness the gallant encounter your worship is going to have with
this knight, more to my taste and better than from the ground.”

“It seems to me rather, Sancho,” said Don Quixote, “that thou wouldst
mount a scaffold in order to see the bulls without danger.”

“To tell the truth,” returned Sancho, “the monstrous nose of that
squire has filled me with fear and terror, and I dare not stay near
him.”

“It is,” said Don Quixote, “such a one that were 