y to shut her up in a
convent in a town near this, in the hope that time may wear away some
of the disgrace she has incurred. Leandra’s youth furnished an excuse
for her fault, at least with those to whom it was of no consequence
whether she was good or bad; but those who knew her shrewdness and
intelligence did not attribute her misdemeanour to ignorance but to
wantonness and the natural disposition of women, which is for the most
part flighty and ill-regulated.

Leandra withdrawn from sight, Anselmo’s eyes grew blind, or at any rate
found nothing to look at that gave them any pleasure, and mine were in
darkness without a ray of light to direct them to anything enjoyable
while Leandra was away. Our melancholy grew greater, our patience grew
less; we cursed the soldier’s finery and railed at the carelessness of
Leandra’s father. At last Anselmo and I agreed to leave the village and
come to this valley; and, he feeding a great flock of sheep of his own,
and I a large herd of goats of mine, we pass our life among the trees,
giving vent to our sorrows, together singing the fair Leandra’s
praises, or upbraiding her, or else sighing alone, and to heaven
pouring forth our complaints in solitude. Following our example, many
more of Leandra’s lovers have come to these rude mountains and adopted
our mode of life, and they are so numerous that one would fancy the
place had been turned into the pastoral Arcadia, so full is it of
shepherds and sheep-folds; nor is there a spot in it where the name of
the fair Leandra is not heard. Here one curses her and calls her
capricious, fickle, and immodest, there another condemns her as frail
and frivolous; this pardons and absolves her, that spurns and reviles
her; one extols her beauty, another assails her character, and in short
all abuse her, and all adore her, and to such a pitch has this general
infatuation gone that there are some who complain of her scorn without
ever having exchanged a word with her, and even some that bewail and
mourn the raging fever of jealousy, for which she never gave anyone
cause, for, as I have already said, her misconduct was known before her
passion. There is no nook among the rocks, no brookside, no shade
beneath the trees that is not haunted by some shepherd telling his woes
to the breezes; wherever there is an echo it repeats the name of
Leandra; the mountains ring with “Leandra,” “Leandra” murmur the
brooks, and Leandra keeps us all bewildered and bewitched, hoping
without hope and fearing without knowing what we fear. Of all this
silly set the one that shows the least and also the most sense is my
rival Anselmo, for having so many other things to complain of, he only
complains of separation, and to the accompaniment of a rebeck, which he
plays admirably, he sings his complaints in verses that show his
ingenuity. I follow another, easier, and to my mind wiser course, and
that is to rail at the frivolity of women, at their inconstancy, their
double dealing, their broken promises, their unkept pledges, and in
short the want of reflection they show in fixing their affections and
inclinations. This, sirs, was the reason of words and expressions I
made use of to this goat when I came up just now; for as she is a
female I have a contempt for her, though she is the best in all my
fold. This is the story I promised to tell you, and if I have been
tedious in telling it, I will not be slow to serve you; my hut is close
by, and I have fresh milk and dainty cheese there, as well as a variety
of toothsome fruit, no less pleasing to the eye than to the palate.



c51e.jpg (14K)



CHAPTER LII.
OF THE QUARREL THAT DON QUIXOTE HAD WITH THE GOATHERD, TOGETHER WITH
THE RARE ADVENTURE OF THE PENITENTS, WHICH WITH AN EXPENDITURE OF SWEAT
HE BROUGHT TO A HAPPY CONCLUSION




c52a.jpg (40K)

Full Size




The goatherd’s tale gave great satisfaction to all the hearers, and the
canon especially enjoyed it, fo