 they give it to me upon whom wouldst thou
have me bestow it but upon thee?”

“That is plain speaking,” said Sancho; “but let your worship take care
to choose it on the seacoast, so that if I don’t like the life, I may
be able to ship off my black vassals and deal with them as I have said;
don’t mind going to see my lady Dulcinea now, but go and kill this
giant and let us finish off this business; for by God it strikes me it
will be one of great honour and great profit.”

“I hold thou art in the right of it, Sancho,” said Don Quixote, “and I
will take thy advice as to accompanying the princess before going to
see Dulcinea; but I counsel thee not to say anything to anyone, or to
those who are with us, about what we have considered and discussed, for
as Dulcinea is so decorous that she does not wish her thoughts to be
known it is not right that I or anyone for me should disclose them.”

“Well then, if that be so,” said Sancho, “how is it that your worship
makes all those you overcome by your arm go to present themselves
before my lady Dulcinea, this being the same thing as signing your name
to it that you love her and are her lover? And as those who go must
perforce kneel before her and say they come from your worship to submit
themselves to her, how can the thoughts of both of you be hid?”

“O, how silly and simple thou art!” said Don Quixote; “seest thou not,
Sancho, that this tends to her greater exaltation? For thou must know
that according to our way of thinking in chivalry, it is a high honour
to a lady to have many knights-errant in her service, whose thoughts
never go beyond serving her for her own sake, and who look for no other
reward for their great and true devotion than that she should be
willing to accept them as her knights.”

“It is with that kind of love,” said Sancho, “I have heard preachers
say we ought to love our Lord, for himself alone, without being moved
by the hope of glory or the fear of punishment; though for my part, I
would rather love and serve him for what he could do.”

“The devil take thee for a clown!” said Don Quixote, “and what shrewd
things thou sayest at times! One would think thou hadst studied.”

“In faith, then, I cannot even read.”

Master Nicholas here called out to them to wait a while, as they wanted
to halt and drink at a little spring there was there. Don Quixote drew
up, not a little to the satisfaction of Sancho, for he was by this time
weary of telling so many lies, and in dread of his master catching him
tripping, for though he knew that Dulcinea was a peasant girl of El
Toboso, he had never seen her in all his life. Cardenio had now put on
the clothes which Dorothea was wearing when they found her, and though
they were not very good, they were far better than those he put off.
They dismounted together by the side of the spring, and with what the
curate had provided himself with at the inn they appeased, though not
very well, the keen appetite they all of them brought with them.

While they were so employed there happened to come by a youth passing
on his way, who stopping to examine the party at the spring, the next
moment ran to Don Quixote and clasping him round the legs, began to
weep freely, saying, “O, señor, do you not know me? Look at me well; I
am that lad Andres that your worship released from the oak-tree where I
was tied.”

Don Quixote recognised him, and taking his hand he turned to those
present and said: “That your worships may see how important it is to
have knights-errant to redress the wrongs and injuries done by
tyrannical and wicked men in this world, I may tell you that some days
ago passing through a wood, I heard cries and piteous complaints as of
a person in pain and distress; I immediately hastened, impelled by my
bounden duty, to the quarter whence the plaintive accents seemed to me
to proceed, and I found tied to an oak this lad who now stands before
you, which in my heart I rejoice a