are you thinking of turning hermit? Hush, for heaven’s sake,
be rational and let’s have no more nonsense.”

“All that nonsense,” said Don Quixote, “that until now has been a
reality to my hurt, my death will, with heaven’s help, turn to my good.
I feel, sirs, that I am rapidly drawing near death; a truce to jesting;
let me have a confessor to confess me, and a notary to make my will;
for in extremities like this, man must not trifle with his soul; and
while the curate is confessing me let someone, I beg, go for the
notary.”

They looked at one another, wondering at Don Quixote’s words; but,
though uncertain, they were inclined to believe him, and one of the
signs by which they came to the conclusion he was dying was this so
sudden and complete return to his senses after having been mad; for to
the words already quoted he added much more, so well expressed, so
devout, and so rational, as to banish all doubt and convince them that
he was sound of mind. The curate turned them all out, and left alone
with him confessed him. The bachelor went for the notary and returned
shortly afterwards with him and with Sancho, who, having already
learned from the bachelor the condition his master was in, and finding
the housekeeper and niece weeping, began to blubber and shed tears.

The confession over, the curate came out saying, “Alonso Quixano the
Good is indeed dying, and is indeed in his right mind; we may now go in
to him while he makes his will.”

This news gave a tremendous impulse to the brimming eyes of the
housekeeper, niece, and Sancho Panza his good squire, making the tears
burst from their eyes and a host of sighs from their hearts; for of a
truth, as has been said more than once, whether as plain Alonso Quixano
the Good, or as Don Quixote of La Mancha, Don Quixote was always of a
gentle disposition and kindly in all his ways, and hence he was
beloved, not only by those of his own house, but by all who knew him.

The notary came in with the rest, and as soon as the preamble of the
will had been set out and Don Quixote had commended his soul to God
with all the devout formalities that are usual, coming to the bequests,
he said, “Item, it is my will that, touching certain moneys in the
hands of Sancho Panza (whom in my madness I made my squire), inasmuch
as between him and me there have been certain accounts and debits and
credits, no claim be made against him, nor any account demanded of him
in respect of them; but that if anything remain over and above, after
he has paid himself what I owe him, the balance, which will be but
little, shall be his, and much good may it do him; and if, as when I
was mad I had a share in giving him the government of an island, so,
now that I am in my senses, I could give him that of a kingdom, it
should be his, for the simplicity of his character and the fidelity of
his conduct deserve it.” And then, turning to Sancho, he said, “Forgive
me, my friend, that I led thee to seem as mad as myself, making thee
fall into the same error I myself fell into, that there were and still
are knights-errant in the world.”

“Ah!” said Sancho weeping, “don’t die, master, but take my advice and
live many years; for the foolishest thing a man can do in this life is
to let himself die without rhyme or reason, without anybody killing
him, or any hands but melancholy’s making an end of him. Come, don’t be
lazy, but get up from your bed and let us take to the fields in
shepherd’s trim as we agreed. Perhaps behind some bush we shall find
the lady Dulcinea disenchanted, as fine as fine can be. If it be that
you are dying of vexation at having been vanquished, lay the blame on
me, and say you were overthrown because I had girthed Rocinante badly;
besides you must have seen in your books of chivalry that it is a
common thing for knights to upset one another, and for him who is
conquered to-day to be conqueror to-morrow.”

“Very true,” said Samson, “and good Sanc