romise I have given. Forward then, Sancho my friend, let us go to keep
the year of the novitiate in our own country, and in that seclusion we
shall pick up fresh strength to return to the by me never-forgotten
calling of arms.”

“Señor,” returned Sancho, “travelling on foot is not such a pleasant
thing that it makes me feel disposed or tempted to make long marches.
Let us leave this armour hung up on some tree, instead of someone that
has been hanged; and then with me on Dapple’s back and my feet off the
ground we will arrange the stages as your worship pleases to measure
them out; but to suppose that I am going to travel on foot, and make
long ones, is to suppose nonsense.”

“Thou sayest well, Sancho,” said Don Quixote; “let my armour be hung up
for a trophy, and under it or round it we will carve on the trees what
was inscribed on the trophy of Roland’s armour-

These let none move
Who dareth not his might with Roland prove.”


“That’s the very thing,” said Sancho; “and if it was not that we should
feel the want of Rocinante on the road, it would be as well to leave
him hung up too.”

“And yet, I had rather not have either him or the armour hung up,” said
Don Quixote, “that it may not be said, ‘for good service a bad
return.’”

“Your worship is right,” said Sancho; “for, as sensible people hold,
‘the fault of the ass must not be laid on the pack-saddle;’ and, as in
this affair the fault is your worship’s, punish yourself and don’t let
your anger break out against the already battered and bloody armour, or
the meekness of Rocinante, or the tenderness of my feet, trying to make
them travel more than is reasonable.”



p66c.jpg (389K)

Full Size



In converse of this sort the whole of that day went by, as did the four
succeeding ones, without anything occurring to interrupt their journey,
but on the fifth as they entered a village they found a great number of
people at the door of an inn enjoying themselves, as it was a holiday.
Upon Don Quixote’s approach a peasant called out, “One of these two
gentlemen who come here, and who don’t know the parties, will tell us
what we ought to do about our wager.”

“That I will, certainly,” said Don Quixote, “and according to the
rights of the case, if I can manage to understand it.”

“Well, here it is, worthy sir,” said the peasant; “a man of this
village who is so fat that he weighs twenty stone challenged another, a
neighbour of his, who does not weigh more than nine, to run a race. The
agreement was that they were to run a distance of a hundred paces with
equal weights; and when the challenger was asked how the weights were
to be equalised he said that the other, as he weighed nine stone,
should put eleven in iron on his back, and that in this way the twenty
stone of the thin man would equal the twenty stone of the fat one.”

“Not at all,” exclaimed Sancho at once, before Don Quixote could
answer; “it’s for me, that only a few days ago left off being a
governor and a judge, as all the world knows, to settle these doubtful
questions and give an opinion in disputes of all sorts.”

“Answer in God’s name, Sancho my friend,” said Don Quixote, “for I am
not fit to give crumbs to a cat, my wits are so confused and upset.”

With this permission Sancho said to the peasants who stood clustered
round him, waiting with open mouths for the decision to come from his,
“Brothers, what the fat man requires is not in reason, nor has it a
shadow of justice in it; because, if it be true, as they say, that the
challenged may choose the weapons, the other has no right to choose
such as will prevent and keep him from winning. My decision, therefore,
is that the fat challenger prune, peel, thin, trim and correct himself,
and take eleven stone of his flesh off his body, here or there, as he
pleases, and as suits him best; and being in this way reduced to nine
stone weight, he will make himself equal and even with nine stone of
hi