, but only to be inferred from what is set down, that
he was stolen, and a little farther on we see Sancho mounted on the
same ass, without any reappearance of it. They say, too, that he forgot
to state what Sancho did with those hundred crowns that he found in the
valise in the Sierra Morena, as he never alludes to them again, and
there are many who would be glad to know what he did with them, or what
he spent them on, for it is one of the serious omissions of the work.”

“Señor Samson, I am not in a humour now for going into accounts or
explanations,” said Sancho; “for there’s a sinking of the stomach come
over me, and unless I doctor it with a couple of sups of the old stuff
it will put me on the thorn of Santa Lucia. I have it at home, and my
old woman is waiting for me; after dinner I’ll come back, and will
answer you and all the world every question you may choose to ask, as
well about the loss of the ass as about the spending of the hundred
crowns;” and without another word or waiting for a reply he made off
home.

Don Quixote begged and entreated the bachelor to stay and do penance
with him. The bachelor accepted the invitation and remained, a couple
of young pigeons were added to the ordinary fare, at dinner they talked
chivalry, Carrasco fell in with his host’s humour, the banquet came to
an end, they took their afternoon sleep, Sancho returned, and their
conversation was resumed.



p03e.jpg (49K)



CHAPTER IV.
IN WHICH SANCHO PANZA GIVES A SATISFACTORY REPLY TO THE DOUBTS AND
QUESTIONS OF THE BACHELOR SAMSON CARRASCO, TOGETHER WITH OTHER MATTERS
WORTH KNOWING AND TELLING




p04a.jpg (143K)

Full Size



Sancho came back to Don Quixote’s house, and returning to the late
subject of conversation, he said, “As to what Señor Samson said, that
he would like to know by whom, or how, or when my ass was stolen, I say
in reply that the same night we went into the Sierra Morena, flying
from the Holy Brotherhood after that unlucky adventure of the galley
slaves, and the other of the corpse that was going to Segovia, my
master and I ensconced ourselves in a thicket, and there, my master
leaning on his lance, and I seated on my Dapple, battered and weary
with the late frays we fell asleep as if it had been on four feather
mattresses; and I in particular slept so sound, that, whoever he was,
he was able to come and prop me up on four stakes, which he put under
the four corners of the pack-saddle in such a way that he left me
mounted on it, and took away Dapple from under me without my feeling
it.”



p04b.jpg (270K)

Full Size



“That is an easy matter,” said Don Quixote, “and it is no new
occurrence, for the same thing happened to Sacripante at the siege of
Albracca; the famous thief, Brunello, by the same contrivance, took his
horse from between his legs.”

“Day came,” continued Sancho, “and the moment I stirred the stakes gave
way and I fell to the ground with a mighty come down; I looked about
for the ass, but could not see him; the tears rushed to my eyes and I
raised such a lamentation that, if the author of our history has not
put it in, he may depend upon it he has left out a good thing. Some
days after, I know not how many, travelling with her ladyship the
Princess Micomicona, I saw my ass, and mounted upon him, in the dress
of a gipsy, was that Gines de Pasamonte, the great rogue and rascal
that my master and I freed from the chain.”

“That is not where the mistake is,” replied Samson; “it is, that before
the ass has turned up, the author speaks of Sancho as being mounted on
it.”

“I don’t know what to say to that,” said Sancho, “unless that the
historian made a mistake, or perhaps it might be a blunder of the
printer’s.”

“No doubt that’s it,” said Samson; “but what became of the hundred
crowns? Did they vanish?”

To which Sancho answered, “I spent them for my own good, and my wife’s,
and my children’s, and it is they that