pts and frees thee from every consideration and
obligation, and thou canst say what thou wilt of the story without fear
of being abused for any ill or rewarded for any good thou mayest say of
it.

My wish would be simply to present it to thee plain and unadorned,
without any embellishment of preface or uncountable muster of customary
sonnets, epigrams, and eulogies, such as are commonly put at the
beginning of books. For I can tell thee, though composing it cost me
some labour, I found none greater than the making of this Preface thou
art now reading. Many times did I take up my pen to write it, and many
did I lay it down again, not knowing what to write. One of these times,
as I was pondering with the paper before me, a pen in my ear, my elbow
on the desk, and my cheek in my hand, thinking of what I should say,
there came in unexpectedly a certain lively, clever friend of mine,
who, seeing me so deep in thought, asked the reason; to which I, making
no mystery of it, answered that I was thinking of the Preface I had to
make for the story of “Don Quixote,” which so troubled me that I had a
mind not to make any at all, nor even publish the achievements of so
noble a knight.

“For, how could you expect me not to feel uneasy about what that
ancient lawgiver they call the Public will say when it sees me, after
slumbering so many years in the silence of oblivion, coming out now
with all my years upon my back, and with a book as dry as a rush,
devoid of invention, meagre in style, poor in thoughts, wholly wanting
in learning and wisdom, without quotations in the margin or annotations
at the end, after the fashion of other books I see, which, though all
fables and profanity, are so full of maxims from Aristotle, and Plato,
and the whole herd of philosophers, that they fill the readers with
amazement and convince them that the authors are men of learning,
erudition, and eloquence. And then, when they quote the Holy
Scriptures!—anyone would say they are St. Thomases or other doctors of
the Church, observing as they do a decorum so ingenious that in one
sentence they describe a distracted lover and in the next deliver a
devout little sermon that it is a pleasure and a treat to hear and
read. Of all this there will be nothing in my book, for I have nothing
to quote in the margin or to note at the end, and still less do I know
what authors I follow in it, to place them at the beginning, as all do,
under the letters A, B, C, beginning with Aristotle and ending with
Xenophon, or Zoilus, or Zeuxis, though one was a slanderer and the
other a painter. Also my book must do without sonnets at the beginning,
at least sonnets whose authors are dukes, marquises, counts, bishops,
ladies, or famous poets. Though if I were to ask two or three obliging
friends, I know they would give me them, and such as the productions of
those that have the highest reputation in our Spain could not equal.

“In short, my friend,” I continued, “I am determined that Señor Don
Quixote shall remain buried in the archives of his own La Mancha until
Heaven provide someone to garnish him with all those things he stands
in need of; because I find myself, through my shallowness and want of
learning, unequal to supplying them, and because I am by nature shy and
careless about hunting for authors to say what I myself can say without
them. Hence the cogitation and abstraction you found me in, and reason
enough, what you have heard from me.”

Hearing this, my friend, giving himself a slap on the forehead and
breaking into a hearty laugh, exclaimed, “Before God, Brother, now am I
disabused of an error in which I have been living all this long time I
have known you, all through which I have taken you to be shrewd and
sensible in all you do; but now I see you are as far from that as the
heaven is from the earth. Is it possible that things of so little
moment and so easy to set right can occupy and perplex a ripe wit like
y