ty to hear of his eldest son,
and he prays God unceasingly that death may not close his eyes until he
has looked upon those of his son; but with regard to him what surprises
me is, that having so much common sense as he had, he should have
neglected to give any intelligence about himself, either in his
troubles and sufferings, or in his prosperity, for if his father or any
of us had known of his condition he need not have waited for that
miracle of the reed to obtain his ransom; but what now disquiets me is
the uncertainty whether those Frenchmen may have restored him to
liberty, or murdered him to hide the robbery. All this will make me
continue my journey, not with the satisfaction in which I began it, but
in the deepest melancholy and sadness. Oh dear brother! that I only
knew where thou art now, and I would hasten to seek thee out and
deliver thee from thy sufferings, though it were to cost me suffering
myself! Oh that I could bring news to our old father that thou art
alive, even wert thou in the deepest dungeon of Barbary; for his wealth
and my brother’s and mine would rescue thee thence! Oh beautiful and
generous Zoraida, that I could repay thy goodness to a brother! That I
could be present at the new birth of thy soul, and at thy bridal that
would give us all such happiness!”

All this and more the Judge uttered with such deep emotion at the news
he had received of his brother that all who heard him shared in it,
showing their sympathy with his sorrow. The curate, seeing, then, how
well he had succeeded in carrying out his purpose and the captain’s
wishes, had no desire to keep them unhappy any longer, so he rose from
the table and going into the room where Zoraida was he took her by the
hand, Luscinda, Dorothea, and the Judge’s daughter following her. The
captain was waiting to see what the curate would do, when the latter,
taking him with the other hand, advanced with both of them to where the
Judge and the other gentlemen were and said, “Let your tears cease to
flow, Señor Judge, and the wish of your heart be gratified as fully as
you could desire, for you have before you your worthy brother and your
good sister-in-law. He whom you see here is the Captain Viedma, and
this is the fair Moor who has been so good to him. The Frenchmen I told
you of have reduced them to the state of poverty you see that you may
show the generosity of your kind heart.”

The captain ran to embrace his brother, who placed both hands on his
breast so as to have a good look at him, holding him a little way off
but as soon as he had fully recognised him he clasped him in his arms
so closely, shedding such tears of heartfelt joy, that most of those
present could not but join in them. The words the brothers exchanged,
the emotion they showed can scarcely be imagined, I fancy, much less
put down in writing. They told each other in a few words the events of
their lives; they showed the true affection of brothers in all its
strength; then the judge embraced Zoraida, putting all he possessed at
her disposal; then he made his daughter embrace her, and the fair
Christian and the lovely Moor drew fresh tears from every eye. And
there was Don Quixote observing all these strange proceedings
attentively without uttering a word, and attributing the whole to
chimeras of knight-errantry. Then they agreed that the captain and
Zoraida should return with his brother to Seville, and send news to his
father of his having been delivered and found, so as to enable him to
come and be present at the marriage and baptism of Zoraida, for it was
impossible for the Judge to put off his journey, as he was informed
that in a month from that time the fleet was to sail from Seville for
New Spain, and to miss the passage would have been a great
inconvenience to him. In short, everybody was well pleased and glad at
the captive’s good fortune; and as now almost two-thirds of the night
were past, they resolved to retire