at he was in the stable seeing to his mule; which was
what Sancho and the cousin proceeded to do for their beasts, giving the
best manger and the best place in the stable to Rocinante.



p24e.jpg (61K)



CHAPTER XXV.
WHEREIN IS SET DOWN THE BRAYING ADVENTURE, AND THE DROLL ONE OF THE
PUPPET-SHOWMAN, TOGETHER WITH THE MEMORABLE DIVINATIONS OF THE DIVINING
APE




p25a.jpg (154K)

Full Size



Don Quixote’s bread would not bake, as the common saying is, until he
had heard and learned the curious things promised by the man who
carried the arms. He went to seek him where the innkeeper said he was
and having found him, bade him say now at any rate what he had to say
in answer to the question he had asked him on the road. “The tale of my
wonders must be taken more leisurely and not standing,” said the man;
“let me finish foddering my beast, good sir; and then I’ll tell you
things that will astonish you.”

“Don’t wait for that,” said Don Quixote; “I’ll help you in everything,”
and so he did, sifting the barley for him and cleaning out the manger;
a degree of humility which made the other feel bound to tell him with a
good grace what he had asked; so seating himself on a bench, with Don
Quixote beside him, and the cousin, the page, Sancho Panza, and the
landlord, for a senate and an audience, he began his story in this way:

“You must know that in a village four leagues and a half from this inn,
it so happened that one of the regidors, by the tricks and roguery of a
servant girl of his (it’s too long a tale to tell), lost an ass; and
though he did all he possibly could to find it, it was all to no
purpose. A fortnight might have gone by, so the story goes, since the
ass had been missing, when, as the regidor who had lost it was standing
in the plaza, another regidor of the same town said to him, ‘Pay me for
good news, gossip; your ass has turned up.’ ‘That I will, and well,
gossip,’ said the other; ‘but tell us, where has he turned up?’ ‘In the
forest,’ said the finder; ‘I saw him this morning without pack-saddle
or harness of any sort, and so lean that it went to one’s heart to see
him. I tried to drive him before me and bring him to you, but he is
already so wild and shy that when I went near him he made off into the
thickest part of the forest. If you have a mind that we two should go
back and look for him, let me put up this she-ass at my house and I’ll
be back at once.’ ‘You will be doing me a great kindness,’ said the
owner of the ass, ‘and I’ll try to pay it back in the same coin.’ It is
with all these circumstances, and in the very same way I am telling it
now, that those who know all about the matter tell the story. Well
then, the two regidors set off on foot, arm in arm, for the forest, and
coming to the place where they hoped to find the ass they could not
find him, nor was he to be seen anywhere about, search as they might.
Seeing, then, that there was no sign of him, the regidor who had seen
him said to the other, ‘Look here, gossip; a plan has occurred to me,
by which, beyond a doubt, we shall manage to discover the animal, even
if he is stowed away in the bowels of the earth, not to say the forest.
Here it is. I can bray to perfection, and if you can ever so little,
the thing’s as good as done.’ ‘Ever so little did you say, gossip?’
said the other; ‘by God, I’ll not give in to anybody, not even to the
asses themselves.’ ‘We’ll soon see,’ said the second regidor, ‘for my
plan is that you should go one side of the forest, and I the other, so
as to go all round about it; and every now and then you will bray and I
will bray; and it cannot be but that the ass will hear us, and answer
us if he is in the forest.’ To which the owner of the ass replied,
‘It’s an excellent plan, I declare, gossip, and worthy of your great
genius;’ and the two separating as agreed, it so fell out that they
brayed almost at the same moment, and each, deceived by the brayi