f Count Pierres that you speak of, and
say is near Babieca’s saddle in the Armoury, I confess my sin; for I am
either so stupid or so short-sighted, that, though I have seen the
saddle, I have never been able to see the pin, in spite of it being as
big as your worship says it is.”

“For all that it is there, without any manner of doubt,” said Don
Quixote; “and more by token they say it is inclosed in a sheath of
cowhide to keep it from rusting.”

“All that may be,” replied the canon; “but, by the orders I have
received, I do not remember seeing it. However, granting it is there,
that is no reason why I am bound to believe the stories of all those
Amadises and of all that multitude of knights they tell us about, nor
is it reasonable that a man like your worship, so worthy, and with so
many good qualities, and endowed with such a good understanding, should
allow himself to be persuaded that such wild crazy things as are
written in those absurd books of chivalry are really true.”



c49e.jpg (22K)



CHAPTER L.
OF THE SHREWD CONTROVERSY WHICH DON QUIXOTE AND THE CANON HELD,
TOGETHER WITH OTHER INCIDENTS




c50a.jpg (160K)

Full Size




“A good joke, that!” returned Don Quixote. “Books that have been
printed with the king’s licence, and with the approbation of those to
whom they have been submitted, and read with universal delight, and
extolled by great and small, rich and poor, learned and ignorant,
gentle and simple, in a word by people of every sort, of whatever rank
or condition they may be—that these should be lies! And above all when
they carry such an appearance of truth with them; for they tell us the
father, mother, country, kindred, age, place, and the achievements,
step by step, and day by day, performed by such a knight or knights!
Hush, sir; utter not such blasphemy; trust me I am advising you now to
act as a sensible man should; only read them, and you will see the
pleasure you will derive from them. For, come, tell me, can there be
anything more delightful than to see, as it were, here now displayed
before us a vast lake of bubbling pitch with a host of snakes and
serpents and lizards, and ferocious and terrible creatures of all sorts
swimming about in it, while from the middle of the lake there comes a
plaintive voice saying: ‘Knight, whosoever thou art who beholdest this
dread lake, if thou wouldst win the prize that lies hidden beneath
these dusky waves, prove the valour of thy stout heart and cast thyself
into the midst of its dark burning waters, else thou shalt not be
worthy to see the mighty wonders contained in the seven castles of the
seven Fays that lie beneath this black expanse;’ and then the knight,
almost ere the awful voice has ceased, without stopping to consider,
without pausing to reflect upon the danger to which he is exposing
himself, without even relieving himself of the weight of his massive
armour, commending himself to God and to his lady, plunges into the
midst of the boiling lake, and when he little looks for it, or knows
what his fate is to be, he finds himself among flowery meadows, with
which the Elysian fields are not to be compared.



c50b.jpg (344K)

Full Size




“The sky seems more transparent there, and the sun shines with a
strange brilliancy, and a delightful grove of green leafy trees
presents itself to the eyes and charms the sight with its verdure,
while the ear is soothed by the sweet untutored melody of the countless
birds of gay plumage that flit to and fro among the interlacing
branches. Here he sees a brook whose limpid waters, like liquid
crystal, ripple over fine sands and white pebbles that look like sifted
gold and purest pearls. There he perceives a cunningly wrought fountain
of many-coloured jasper and polished marble; here another of rustic
fashion where the little mussel-shells and the spiral white and yellow
mansions of the snail disposed in studious disorder, mingled with