res.
On one occasion she bade me go and challenge the famous giantess of
Seville, La Giralda by name, who is as mighty and strong as if made of
brass, and though never stirring from one spot, is the most restless
and changeable woman in the world. I came, I saw, I conquered, and I
made her stay quiet and behave herself, for nothing but north winds
blew for more than a week. Another time I was ordered to lift those
ancient stones, the mighty bulls of Guisando, an enterprise that might
more fitly be entrusted to porters than to knights. Again, she bade me
fling myself into the cavern of Cabra—an unparalleled and awful
peril—and bring her a minute account of all that is concealed in those
gloomy depths. I stopped the motion of the Giralda, I lifted the bulls
of Guisando, I flung myself into the cavern and brought to light the
secrets of its abyss; and my hopes are as dead as dead can be, and her
scorn and her commands as lively as ever. To be brief, last of all she
has commanded me to go through all the provinces of Spain and compel
all the knights-errant wandering therein to confess that she surpasses
all women alive to-day in beauty, and that I am the most valiant and
the most deeply enamoured knight on earth; in support of which claim I
have already travelled over the greater part of Spain, and have there
vanquished several knights who have dared to contradict me; but what I
most plume and pride myself upon is having vanquished in single combat
that so famous knight Don Quixote of La Mancha, and made him confess
that my Casildea is more beautiful than his Dulcinea; and in this one
victory I hold myself to have conquered all the knights in the world;
for this Don Quixote that I speak of has vanquished them all, and I
having vanquished him, his glory, his fame, and his honour have passed
and are transferred to my person; for

The more the vanquished hath of fair renown,
The greater glory gilds the victor’s crown.


Thus the innumerable achievements of the said Don Quixote are now set
down to my account and have become mine.”

Don Quixote was amazed when he heard the Knight of the Grove, and was a
thousand times on the point of telling him he lied, and had the lie
direct already on the tip of his tongue; but he restrained himself as
well as he could, in order to force him to confess the lie with his own
lips; so he said to him quietly, “As to what you say, sir knight, about
having vanquished most of the knights of Spain, or even of the whole
world, I say nothing; but that you have vanquished Don Quixote of La
Mancha I consider doubtful; it may have been some other that resembled
him, although there are few like him.”

“How! not vanquished?” said he of the Grove; “by the heaven that is
above us I fought Don Quixote and overcame him and made him yield; and
he is a man of tall stature, gaunt features, long, lank limbs, with
hair turning grey, an aquiline nose rather hooked, and large black
drooping moustaches; he does battle under the name of ‘The
Countenance,’ and he has for squire a peasant called Sancho Panza; he
presses the loins and rules the reins of a famous steed called
Rocinante; and lastly, he has for the mistress of his will a certain
Dulcinea del Toboso, once upon a time called Aldonza Lorenzo, just as I
call mine Casildea de Vandalia because her name is Casilda and she is
of Andalusia. If all these tokens are not enough to vindicate the truth
of what I say, here is my sword, that will compel incredulity itself to
give credence to it.”

“Calm yourself, sir knight,” said Don Quixote, “and give ear to what I
am about to say to you. I would have you know that this Don Quixote you
speak of is the greatest friend I have in the world; so much so that I
may say I regard him in the same light as my own person; and from the
precise and clear indications you have given I cannot but think that he
must be the very one you have vanquished. On the other hand, I see with