ge his own business;
this is mine, and I know whether these gentlemen the lions come to me
or not;” and then turning to the keeper he exclaimed, “By all that’s
good, sir scoundrel, if you don’t open the cages this very instant,
I’ll pin you to the cart with this lance.”

The carter, seeing the determination of this apparition in armour, said
to him, “Please your worship, for charity’s sake, señor, let me unyoke
the mules and place myself in safety along with them before the lions
are turned out; for if they kill them on me I am ruined for life, for
all I possess is this cart and mules.”

“O man of little faith,” replied Don Quixote, “get down and unyoke; you
will soon see that you are exerting yourself for nothing, and that you
might have spared yourself the trouble.”

The carter got down and with all speed unyoked the mules, and the
keeper called out at the top of his voice, “I call all here to witness
that against my will and under compulsion I open the cages and let the
lions loose, and that I warn this gentleman that he will be accountable
for all the harm and mischief which these beasts may do, and for my
salary and dues as well. You, gentlemen, place yourselves in safety
before I open, for I know they will do me no harm.”

Once more the gentleman strove to persuade Don Quixote not to do such a
mad thing, as it was tempting God to engage in such a piece of folly.
To this, Don Quixote replied that he knew what he was about. The
gentleman in return entreated him to reflect, for he knew he was under
a delusion.

“Well, señor,” answered Don Quixote, “if you do not like to be a
spectator of this tragedy, as in your opinion it will be, spur your
flea-bitten mare, and place yourself in safety.”

Hearing this, Sancho with tears in his eyes entreated him to give up an
enterprise compared with which the one of the windmills, and the awful
one of the fulling mills, and, in fact, all the feats he had attempted
in the whole course of his life, were cakes and fancy bread. “Look ye,
señor,” said Sancho, “there’s no enchantment here, nor anything of the
sort, for between the bars and chinks of the cage I have seen the paw
of a real lion, and judging by that I reckon the lion such a paw could
belong to must be bigger than a mountain.”

“Fear at any rate,” replied Don Quixote, “will make him look bigger to
thee than half the world. Retire, Sancho, and leave me; and if I die
here thou knowest our old compact; thou wilt repair to Dulcinea—I say
no more.” To these he added some further words that banished all hope
of his giving up his insane project. He of the green gaban would have
offered resistance, but he found himself ill-matched as to arms, and
did not think it prudent to come to blows with a madman, for such Don
Quixote now showed himself to be in every respect; and the latter,
renewing his commands to the keeper and repeating his threats, gave
warning to the gentleman to spur his mare, Sancho his Dapple, and the
carter his mules, all striving to get away from the cart as far as they
could before the lions broke loose. Sancho was weeping over his
master’s death, for this time he firmly believed it was in store for
him from the claws of the lions; and he cursed his fate and called it
an unlucky hour when he thought of taking service with him again; but
with all his tears and lamentations he did not forget to thrash Dapple
so as to put a good space between himself and the cart. The keeper,
seeing that the fugitives were now some distance off, once more
entreated and warned him as before; but he replied that he heard him,
and that he need not trouble himself with any further warnings or
entreaties, as they would be fruitless, and bade him make haste.

During the delay that occurred while the keeper was opening the first
cage, Don Quixote was considering whether it would not be well to do
battle on foot, instead of on horseback, and finally resolved to fight
on foot, feari