 by seeing the pillar and
prop of knight-errantry on his knees before your sublimated presence?”

On hearing this, one of the others exclaimed, “Woa then! why, I’m
rubbing thee down, she-ass of my father-in-law! See how the lordlings
come to make game of the village girls now, as if we here could not
chaff as well as themselves. Go your own way, and let us go ours, and
it will be better for you.”

“Get up, Sancho,” said Don Quixote at this; “I see that fortune, ‘with
evil done to me unsated still,’ has taken possession of all the roads
by which any comfort may reach ‘this wretched soul’ that I carry in my
flesh. And thou, highest perfection of excellence that can be desired,
utmost limit of grace in human shape, sole relief of this afflicted
heart that adores thee, though the malign enchanter that persecutes me
has brought clouds and cataracts on my eyes, and to them, and them
only, transformed thy unparagoned beauty and changed thy features into
those of a poor peasant girl, if so be he has not at the same time
changed mine into those of some monster to render them loathsome in thy
sight, refuse not to look upon me with tenderness and love; seeing in
this submission that I make on my knees to thy transformed beauty the
humility with which my soul adores thee.”

“Hey-day! My grandfather!” cried the girl, “much I care for your
love-making! Get out of the way and let us pass, and we’ll thank you.”

Sancho stood aside and let her go, very well pleased to have got so
well out of the hobble he was in. The instant the village lass who had
done duty for Dulcinea found herself free, prodding her “cackney” with
a spike she had at the end of a stick, she set off at full speed across
the field. The she-ass, however, feeling the point more acutely than
usual, began cutting such capers, that it flung the lady Dulcinea to
the ground; seeing which, Don Quixote ran to raise her up, and Sancho
to fix and girth the pack-saddle, which also had slipped under the
ass’s belly. The pack-saddle being secured, as Don Quixote was about to
lift up his enchanted mistress in his arms and put her upon her beast,
the lady, getting up from the ground, saved him the trouble, for, going
back a little, she took a short run, and putting both hands on the
croup of the ass she dropped into the saddle more lightly than a
falcon, and sat astride like a man, whereat Sancho said, “Rogue! but
our lady is lighter than a lanner, and might teach the cleverest
Cordovan or Mexican how to mount; she cleared the back of the saddle in
one jump, and without spurs she is making the hackney go like a zebra;
and her damsels are no way behind her, for they all fly like the wind;”
which was the truth, for as soon as they saw Dulcinea mounted, they
pushed on after her, and sped away without looking back, for more than
half a league.

Don Quixote followed them with his eyes, and when they were no longer
in sight, he turned to Sancho and said, “How now, Sancho? thou seest
how I am hated by enchanters! And see to what a length the malice and
spite they bear me go, when they seek to deprive me of the happiness it
would give me to see my lady in her own proper form. The fact is I was
born to be an example of misfortune, and the target and mark at which
the arrows of adversity are aimed and directed. Observe too, Sancho,
that these traitors were not content with changing and transforming my
Dulcinea, but they transformed and changed her into a shape as mean and
ill-favoured as that of the village girl yonder; and at the same time
they robbed her of that which is such a peculiar property of ladies of
distinction, that is to say, the sweet fragrance that comes of being
always among perfumes and flowers. For I must tell thee, Sancho, that
when I approached to put Dulcinea upon her hackney (as thou sayest it
was, though to me it appeared a she-ass), she gave me a whiff of raw
garlic that made my head reel, and poisoned my very hear