n so in reality had he been as
clever in preserving his property as he was in spending it. This
tendency of his to be liberal and profuse he had acquired from having
been a soldier in his youth, for the soldier’s life is a school in
which the niggard becomes free-handed and the free-handed prodigal; and
if any soldiers are to be found who are misers, they are monsters of
rare occurrence. My father went beyond liberality and bordered on
prodigality, a disposition by no means advantageous to a married man
who has children to succeed to his name and position. My father had
three, all sons, and all of sufficient age to make choice of a
profession. Finding, then, that he was unable to resist his propensity,
he resolved to divest himself of the instrument and cause of his
prodigality and lavishness, to divest himself of wealth, without which
Alexander himself would have seemed parsimonious; and so calling us all
three aside one day into a room, he addressed us in words somewhat to
the following effect:

“My sons, to assure you that I love you, no more need be known or said
than that you are my sons; and to encourage a suspicion that I do not
love you, no more is needed than the knowledge that I have no
self-control as far as preservation of your patrimony is concerned;
therefore, that you may for the future feel sure that I love you like a
father, and have no wish to ruin you like a stepfather, I propose to do
with you what I have for some time back meditated, and after mature
deliberation decided upon. You are now of an age to choose your line of
life or at least make choice of a calling that will bring you honour
and profit when you are older; and what I have resolved to do is to
divide my property into four parts; three I will give to you, to each
his portion without making any difference, and the other I will retain
to live upon and support myself for whatever remainder of life Heaven
may be pleased to grant me. But I wish each of you on taking possession
of the share that falls to him to follow one of the paths I shall
indicate. In this Spain of ours there is a proverb, to my mind very
true—as they all are, being short aphorisms drawn from long practical
experience—and the one I refer to says, ‘The church, or the sea, or the
king’s house;’ as much as to say, in plainer language, whoever wants to
flourish and become rich, let him follow the church, or go to sea,
adopting commerce as his calling, or go into the king’s service in his
household, for they say, ‘Better a king’s crumb than a lord’s favour.’
I say so because it is my will and pleasure that one of you should
follow letters, another trade, and the third serve the king in the
wars, for it is a difficult matter to gain admission to his service in
his household, and if war does not bring much wealth it confers great
distinction and fame. Eight days hence I will give you your full shares
in money, without defrauding you of a farthing, as you will see in the
end. Now tell me if you are willing to follow out my idea and advice as
I have laid it before you.”

Having called upon me as the eldest to answer, I, after urging him not
to strip himself of his property but to spend it all as he pleased, for
we were young men able to gain our living, consented to comply with his
wishes, and said that mine were to follow the profession of arms and
thereby serve God and my king. My second brother having made the same
proposal, decided upon going to the Indies, embarking the portion that
fell to him in trade. The youngest, and in my opinion the wisest, said
he would rather follow the church, or go to complete his studies at
Salamanca. As soon as we had come to an understanding, and made choice
of our professions, my father embraced us all, and in the short time he
mentioned carried into effect all he had promised; and when he had
given to each his share, which as well as I remember was three thousand
ducats apiece in cash (for an 