r he had remarked with particular
attention the manner in which it had been told, which was as unlike the
manner of a clownish goatherd as it was like that of a polished city
wit; and he observed that the curate had been quite right in saying
that the woods bred men of learning. They all offered their services to
Eugenio but he who showed himself most liberal in this way was Don
Quixote, who said to him, “Most assuredly, brother goatherd, if I found
myself in a position to attempt any adventure, I would, this very
instant, set out on your behalf, and would rescue Leandra from that
convent (where no doubt she is kept against her will), in spite of the
abbess and all who might try to prevent me, and would place her in your
hands to deal with her according to your will and pleasure, observing,
however, the laws of chivalry which lay down that no violence of any
kind is to be offered to any damsel. But I trust in God our Lord that
the might of one malignant enchanter may not prove so great but that
the power of another better disposed may prove superior to it, and then
I promise you my support and assistance, as I am bound to do by my
profession, which is none other than to give aid to the weak and
needy.”

The goatherd eyed him, and noticing Don Quixote’s sorry appearance and
looks, he was filled with wonder, and asked the barber, who was next
him, “Señor, who is this man who makes such a figure and talks in such
a strain?”

“Who should it be,” said the barber, “but the famous Don Quixote of La
Mancha, the undoer of injustice, the righter of wrongs, the protector
of damsels, the terror of giants, and the winner of battles?”

“That,” said the goatherd, “sounds like what one reads in the books of
the knights-errant, who did all that you say this man does; though it
is my belief that either you are joking, or else this gentleman has
empty lodgings in his head.”

“You are a great scoundrel,” said Don Quixote, “and it is you who are
empty and a fool. I am fuller than ever was the whoreson bitch that
bore you;” and passing from words to deeds, he caught up a loaf that
was near him and sent it full in the goatherd’s face, with such force
that he flattened his nose; but the goatherd, who did not understand
jokes, and found himself roughly handled in such good earnest, paying
no respect to carpet, tablecloth, or diners, sprang upon Don Quixote,
and seizing him by the throat with both hands would no doubt have
throttled him, had not Sancho Panza that instant come to the rescue,
and grasping him by the shoulders flung him down on the table, smashing
plates, breaking glasses, and upsetting and scattering everything on
it. Don Quixote, finding himself free, strove to get on top of the
goatherd, who, with his face covered with blood, and soundly kicked by
Sancho, was on all fours feeling about for one of the table-knives to
take a bloody revenge with. The canon and the curate, however,
prevented him, but the barber so contrived it that he got Don Quixote
under him, and rained down upon him such a shower of fisticuffs that
the poor knight’s face streamed with blood as freely as his own. The
canon and the curate were bursting with laughter, the officers were
capering with delight, and both the one and the other hissed them on as
they do dogs that are worrying one another in a fight. Sancho alone was
frantic, for he could not free himself from the grasp of one of the
canon’s servants, who kept him from going to his master’s assistance.



c52b.jpg (348K)

Full Size




At last, while they were all, with the exception of the two bruisers
who were mauling each other, in high glee and enjoyment, they heard a
trumpet sound a note so doleful that it made them all look in the
direction whence the sound seemed to come. But the one that was most
excited by hearing it was Don Quixote, who though sorely against his
will he was under the goatherd, and something more than pretty well
pu