of the
clarions and the drums. As they were entering it, the wicked one, who
is the author of all mischief, and the boys who are wickeder than the
wicked one, contrived that a couple of these audacious irrepressible
urchins should force their way through the crowd, and lifting up, one
of them Dapple’s tail and the other Rocinante’s, insert a bunch of
furze under each. The poor beasts felt the strange spurs and added to
their anguish by pressing their tails tight, so much so that, cutting a
multitude of capers, they flung their masters to the ground. Don
Quixote, covered with shame and out of countenance, ran to pluck the
plume from his poor jade’s tail, while Sancho did the same for Dapple.
His conductors tried to punish the audacity of the boys, but there was
no possibility of doing so, for they hid themselves among the hundreds
of others that were following them. Don Quixote and Sancho mounted once
more, and with the same music and acclamations reached their
conductor’s house, which was large and stately, that of a rich
gentleman, in short; and there for the present we will leave them, for
such is Cide Hamete’s pleasure.



p61e.jpg (32K)



CHAPTER LXII.
WHICH DEALS WITH THE ADVENTURE OF THE ENCHANTED HEAD, TOGETHER WITH
OTHER TRIVIAL MATTERS WHICH CANNOT BE LEFT UNTOLD




p62a.jpg (156K)

Full Size



Don Quixote’s host was one Don Antonio Moreno by name, a gentleman of
wealth and intelligence, and very fond of diverting himself in any fair
and good-natured way; and having Don Quixote in his house he set about
devising modes of making him exhibit his mad points in some harmless
fashion; for jests that give pain are no jests, and no sport is worth
anything if it hurts another. The first thing he did was to make Don
Quixote take off his armour, and lead him, in that tight chamois suit
we have already described and depicted more than once, out on a balcony
overhanging one of the chief streets of the city, in full view of the
crowd and of the boys, who gazed at him as they would at a monkey. The
cavaliers in livery careered before him again as though it were for him
alone, and not to enliven the festival of the day, that they wore it,
and Sancho was in high delight, for it seemed to him that, how he knew
not, he had fallen upon another Camacho’s wedding, another house like
Don Diego de Miranda’s, another castle like the duke’s. Some of Don
Antonio’s friends dined with him that day, and all showed honour to Don
Quixote and treated him as a knight-errant, and he becoming puffed up
and exalted in consequence could not contain himself for satisfaction.
Such were the drolleries of Sancho that all the servants of the house,
and all who heard him, were kept hanging upon his lips. While at table
Don Antonio said to him, “We hear, worthy Sancho, that you are so fond
of manjar blanco and forced-meat balls, that if you have any left, you
keep them in your bosom for the next day.”

“No, señor, that’s not true,” said Sancho, “for I am more cleanly than
greedy, and my master Don Quixote here knows well that we two are used
to live for a week on a handful of acorns or nuts. To be sure, if it so
happens that they offer me a heifer, I run with a halter; I mean, I eat
what I’m given, and make use of opportunities as I find them; but
whoever says that I’m an out-of-the-way eater or not cleanly, let me
tell him that he is wrong; and I’d put it in a different way if I did
not respect the honourable beards that are at the table.”

“Indeed,” said Don Quixote, “Sancho’s moderation and cleanliness in
eating might be inscribed and graved on plates of brass, to be kept in
eternal remembrance in ages to come. It is true that when he is hungry
there is a certain appearance of voracity about him, for he eats at a
great pace and chews with both jaws; but cleanliness he is always
mindful of; and when he was governor he learned how to eat daintily, so
much so that he eats grapes, an