 had seated themselves together on the hard ground
peaceably and sociably, just as if, as soon as day broke, they were not
going to break one another’s heads.

“Are you, sir knight, in love perchance?” asked he of the Grove of Don
Quixote.

“By mischance I am,” replied Don Quixote; “though the ills arising from
well-bestowed affections should be esteemed favours rather than
misfortunes.”

“That is true,” returned he of the Grove, “if scorn did not unsettle
our reason and understanding, for if it be excessive it looks like
revenge.”

“I was never scorned by my lady,” said Don Quixote.

“Certainly not,” said Sancho, who stood close by, “for my lady is as a
lamb, and softer than a roll of butter.”

“Is this your squire?” asked he of the Grove.

“He is,” said Don Quixote.

“I never yet saw a squire,” said he of the Grove, “who ventured to
speak when his master was speaking; at least, there is mine, who is as
big as his father, and it cannot be proved that he has ever opened his
lips when I am speaking.”

“By my faith then,” said Sancho, “I have spoken, and am fit to speak,
in the presence of one as much, or even—but never mind—it only makes it
worse to stir it.”

The squire of the Grove took Sancho by the arm, saying to him, “Let us
two go where we can talk in squire style as much as we please, and
leave these gentlemen our masters to fight it out over the story of
their loves; and, depend upon it, daybreak will find them at it without
having made an end of it.”

“So be it by all means,” said Sancho; “and I will tell your worship who
I am, that you may see whether I am to be reckoned among the number of
the most talkative squires.”

With this the two squires withdrew to one side, and between them there
passed a conversation as droll as that which passed between their
masters was serious.



p12e.jpg (15K)



CHAPTER XIII.
IN WHICH IS CONTINUED THE ADVENTURE OF THE KNIGHT OF THE GROVE,
TOGETHER WITH THE SENSIBLE, ORIGINAL, AND TRANQUIL COLLOQUY THAT PASSED
BETWEEN THE TWO SQUIRES




p13a.jpg (126K)

Full Size



The knights and the squires made two parties, these telling the story
of their lives, the others the story of their loves; but the history
relates first of all the conversation of the servants, and afterwards
takes up that of the masters; and it says that, withdrawing a little
from the others, he of the Grove said to Sancho, “A hard life it is we
lead and live, señor, we that are squires to knights-errant; verily, we
eat our bread in the sweat of our faces, which is one of the curses God
laid on our first parents.”

“It may be said, too,” added Sancho, “that we eat it in the chill of
our bodies; for who gets more heat and cold than the miserable squires
of knight-errantry? Even so it would not be so bad if we had something
to eat, for woes are lighter if there’s bread; but sometimes we go a
day or two without breaking our fast, except with the wind that blows.”

“All that,” said he of the Grove, “may be endured and put up with when
we have hopes of reward; for, unless the knight-errant he serves is
excessively unlucky, after a few turns the squire will at least find
himself rewarded with a fine government of some island or some fair
county.”

“I,” said Sancho, “have already told my master that I shall be content
with the government of some island, and he is so noble and generous
that he has promised it to me ever so many times.”

“I,” said he of the Grove, “shall be satisfied with a canonry for my
services, and my master has already assigned me one.”

“Your master,” said Sancho, “no doubt is a knight in the Church line,
and can bestow rewards of that sort on his good squire; but mine is
only a layman; though I remember some clever, but, to my mind,
designing people, strove to persuade him to try and become an
archbishop. He, however, would not be anything but an emperor; but I
was trembling all the time lest he should take a