Full Size



Sancho observed all, contemplated all, and everything won his heart.
The first to captivate and take his fancy were the pots, out of which
he would have very gladly helped himself to a moderate pipkinful; then
the wine skins secured his affections; and lastly, the produce of the
frying-pans, if, indeed, such imposing cauldrons may be called
frying-pans; and unable to control himself or bear it any longer, he
approached one of the busy cooks and civilly but hungrily begged
permission to soak a scrap of bread in one of the pots; to which the
cook made answer, “Brother, this is not a day on which hunger is to
have any sway, thanks to the rich Camacho; get down and look about for
a ladle and skim off a hen or two, and much good may they do you.”

“I don’t see one,” said Sancho.

“Wait a bit,” said the cook; “sinner that I am! how particular and
bashful you are!” and so saying, he seized a bucket and plunging it
into one of the half jars took up three hens and a couple of geese, and
said to Sancho, “Fall to, friend, and take the edge off your appetite
with these skimmings until dinner-time comes.”



p20d.jpg (351K)

Full Size



“I have nothing to put them in,” said Sancho.

“Well then,” said the cook, “take spoon and all; for Camacho’s wealth
and happiness furnish everything.”

While Sancho fared thus, Don Quixote was watching the entrance, at one
end of the arcade, of some twelve peasants, all in holiday and gala
dress, mounted on twelve beautiful mares with rich handsome field
trappings and a number of little bells attached to their petrals, who,
marshalled in regular order, ran not one but several courses over the
meadow, with jubilant shouts and cries of “Long live Camacho and
Quiteria! he as rich as she is fair; and she the fairest on earth!”

Hearing this, Don Quixote said to himself, “It is easy to see these
folk have never seen my Dulcinea del Toboso; for if they had they would
be more moderate in their praises of this Quiteria of theirs.”

Shortly after this, several bands of dancers of various sorts began to
enter the arcade at different points, and among them one of
sword-dancers composed of some four-and-twenty lads of gallant and
high-spirited mien, clad in the finest and whitest of linen, and with
handkerchiefs embroidered in various colours with fine silk; and one of
those on the mares asked an active youth who led them if any of the
dancers had been wounded. “As yet, thank God, no one has been wounded,”
said he, “we are all safe and sound;” and he at once began to execute
complicated figures with the rest of his comrades, with so many turns
and so great dexterity, that although Don Quixote was well used to see
dances of the same kind, he thought he had never seen any so good as
this. He also admired another that came in composed of fair young
maidens, none of whom seemed to be under fourteen or over eighteen
years of age, all clad in green stuff, with their locks partly braided,
partly flowing loose, but all of such bright gold as to vie with the
sunbeams, and over them they wore garlands of jessamine, roses,
amaranth, and honeysuckle. At their head were a venerable old man and
an ancient dame, more brisk and active, however, than might have been
expected from their years. The notes of a Zamora bagpipe accompanied
them, and with modesty in their countenances and in their eyes, and
lightness in their feet, they looked the best dancers in the world.



p20e.jpg (361K)

Full Size



Following these there came an artistic dance of the sort they call
“speaking dances.” It was composed of eight nymphs in two files, with
the god Cupid leading one and Interest the other, the former furnished
with wings, bow, quiver and arrows, the latter in a rich dress of gold
and silk of divers colours. The nymphs that followed Love bore their
names written on white parchment in large letters on their backs.
“Poetry” was the name of the fir