eans in
Arabic ‘Lord’—Sancho,” observed Don Quixote.

“Very likely,” replied Sancho, “but if your worship wishes me to fetch
the bachelor I will go for him in a twinkling.”

“Thou wilt do me a great pleasure, my friend,” said Don Quixote, “for
what thou hast told me has amazed me, and I shall not eat a morsel that
will agree with me until I have heard all about it.”

“Then I am off for him,” said Sancho; and leaving his master he went in
quest of the bachelor, with whom he returned in a short time, and, all
three together, they had a very droll colloquy.



p02e.jpg (23K)



CHAPTER III.
OF THE LAUGHABLE CONVERSATION THAT PASSED BETWEEN DON QUIXOTE, SANCHO
PANZA, AND THE BACHELOR SAMSON CARRASCO




p03a.jpg (131K)

Full Size



Don Quixote remained very deep in thought, waiting for the bachelor
Carrasco, from whom he was to hear how he himself had been put into a
book as Sancho said; and he could not persuade himself that any such
history could be in existence, for the blood of the enemies he had
slain was not yet dry on the blade of his sword, and now they wanted to
make out that his mighty achievements were going about in print. For
all that, he fancied some sage, either a friend or an enemy, might, by
the aid of magic, have given them to the press; if a friend, in order
to magnify and exalt them above the most famous ever achieved by any
knight-errant; if an enemy, to bring them to naught and degrade them
below the meanest ever recorded of any low squire, though as he said to
himself, the achievements of squires never were recorded. If, however,
it were the fact that such a history were in existence, it must
necessarily, being the story of a knight-errant, be grandiloquent,
lofty, imposing, grand and true. With this he comforted himself
somewhat, though it made him uncomfortable to think that the author was
a Moor, judging by the title of “Cide;” and that no truth was to be
looked for from Moors, as they are all impostors, cheats, and schemers.
He was afraid he might have dealt with his love affairs in some
indecorous fashion, that might tend to the discredit and prejudice of
the purity of his lady Dulcinea del Toboso; he would have had him set
forth the fidelity and respect he had always observed towards her,
spurning queens, empresses, and damsels of all sorts, and keeping in
check the impetuosity of his natural impulses. Absorbed and wrapped up
in these and divers other cogitations, he was found by Sancho and
Carrasco, whom Don Quixote received with great courtesy.

The bachelor, though he was called Samson, was of no great bodily size,
but he was a very great wag; he was of a sallow complexion, but very
sharp-witted, somewhere about four-and-twenty years of age, with a
round face, a flat nose, and a large mouth, all indications of a
mischievous disposition and a love of fun and jokes; and of this he
gave a sample as soon as he saw Don Quixote, by falling on his knees
before him and saying, “Let me kiss your mightiness’s hand, Señor Don
Quixote of La Mancha, for, by the habit of St. Peter that I wear,
though I have no more than the first four orders, your worship is one
of the most famous knights-errant that have ever been, or will be, all
the world over. A blessing on Cide Hamete Benengeli, who has written
the history of your great deeds, and a double blessing on that
connoisseur who took the trouble of having it translated out of the
Arabic into our Castilian vulgar tongue for the universal entertainment
of the people!”

Don Quixote made him rise, and said, “So, then, it is true that there
is a history of me, and that it was a Moor and a sage who wrote it?”

“So true is it, señor,” said Samson, “that my belief is there are more
than twelve thousand volumes of the said history in print this very
day. Only ask Portugal, Barcelona, and Valencia, where they have been
printed, and moreover there is a report that it is being printed at
Antwer