 and give them all courage;
for with him for their guide and lamp and morning star, they were sure
to bring their business to a successful issue.



p53b.jpg (332K)

Full Size



“How am I to march, unlucky being that I am?” said Sancho, “when I
can’t stir my knee-caps, for these boards I have bound so tight to my
body won’t let me. What you must do is carry me in your arms, and lay
me across or set me upright in some postern, and I’ll hold it either
with this lance or with my body.”

“On, señor governor!” cried another, “it is fear more than the boards
that keeps you from moving; make haste, stir yourself, for there is no
time to lose; the enemy is increasing in numbers, the shouts grow
louder, and the danger is pressing.”

Urged by these exhortations and reproaches the poor governor made an
attempt to advance, but fell to the ground with such a crash that he
fancied he had broken himself all to pieces. There he lay like a
tortoise enclosed in its shell, or a side of bacon between two
kneading-troughs, or a boat bottom up on the beach; nor did the gang of
jokers feel any compassion for him when they saw him down; so far from
that, extinguishing their torches they began to shout afresh and to
renew the calls to arms with such energy, trampling on poor Sancho, and
slashing at him over the shield with their swords in such a way that,
if he had not gathered himself together and made himself small and
drawn in his head between the shields, it would have fared badly with
the poor governor, as, squeezed into that narrow compass, he lay,
sweating and sweating again, and commending himself with all his heart
to God to deliver him from his present peril. Some stumbled over him,
others fell upon him, and one there was who took up a position on top
of him for some time, and from thence as if from a watchtower issued
orders to the troops, shouting out, “Here, our side! Here the enemy is
thickest! Hold the breach there! Shut that gate! Barricade those
ladders! Here with your stink-pots of pitch and resin, and kettles of
boiling oil! Block the streets with feather beds!” In short, in his
ardour he mentioned every little thing, and every implement and engine
of war by means of which an assault upon a city is warded off, while
the bruised and battered Sancho, who heard and suffered all, was saying
to himself, “O if it would only please the Lord to let the island be
lost at once, and I could see myself either dead or out of this
torture!” Heaven heard his prayer, and when he least expected it he
heard voices exclaiming, “Victory, victory! The enemy retreats beaten!
Come, señor governor, get up, and come and enjoy the victory, and
divide the spoils that have been won from the foe by the might of that
invincible arm.”

“Lift me up,” said the wretched Sancho in a woebegone voice. They
helped him to rise, and as soon as he was on his feet said, “The enemy
I have beaten you may nail to my forehead; I don’t want to divide the
spoils of the foe, I only beg and entreat some friend, if I have one,
to give me a sup of wine, for I’m parched with thirst, and wipe me dry,
for I’m turning to water.”

They rubbed him down, fetched him wine and unbound the shields, and he
seated himself upon his bed, and with fear, agitation, and fatigue he
fainted away. Those who had been concerned in the joke were now sorry
they had pushed it so far; however, the anxiety his fainting away had
caused them was relieved by his returning to himself. He asked what
o’clock it was; they told him it was just daybreak. He said no more,
and in silence began to dress himself, while all watched him, waiting
to see what the haste with which he was putting on his clothes meant.



p53c.jpg (389K)

Full Size



He got himself dressed at last, and then, slowly, for he was sorely
bruised and could not go fast, he proceeded to the stable, followed by
all who were present, and going up to Dapple embraced him and g