? For by all that is good it
is as true as that it is daylight now; and if it be a lie, it must be a
lie too that there was a Hector, or Achilles, or Trojan war, or Twelve
Peers of France, or Arthur of England, who still lives changed into a
raven, and is unceasingly looked for in his kingdom. One might just as
well try to make out that the history of Guarino Mezquino, or of the
quest of the Holy Grail, is false, or that the loves of Tristram and
the Queen Yseult are apocryphal, as well as those of Guinevere and
Lancelot, when there are persons who can almost remember having seen
the Dame Quintañona, who was the best cupbearer in Great Britain. And
so true is this, that I recollect a grandmother of mine on the father’s
side, whenever she saw any dame in a venerable hood, used to say to me,
‘Grandson, that one is like Dame Quintañona,’ from which I conclude
that she must have known her, or at least had managed to see some
portrait of her. Then who can deny that the story of Pierres and the
fair Magalona is true, when even to this day may be seen in the king’s
armoury the pin with which the valiant Pierres guided the wooden horse
he rode through the air, and it is a trifle bigger than the pole of a
cart? And alongside of the pin is Babieca’s saddle, and at Roncesvalles
there is Roland’s horn, as large as a large beam; whence we may infer
that there were Twelve Peers, and a Pierres, and a Cid, and other
knights like them, of the sort people commonly call adventurers. Or
perhaps I shall be told, too, that there was no such knight-errant as
the valiant Lusitanian Juan de Merlo, who went to Burgundy and in the
city of Arras fought with the famous lord of Charny, Mosen Pierres by
name, and afterwards in the city of Basle with Mosen Enrique de
Remesten, coming out of both encounters covered with fame and honour;
or adventures and challenges achieved and delivered, also in Burgundy,
by the valiant Spaniards Pedro Barba and Gutierre Quixada (of whose
family I come in the direct male line), when they vanquished the sons
of the Count of San Polo. I shall be told, too, that Don Fernando de
Guevara did not go in quest of adventures to Germany, where he engaged
in combat with Micer George, a knight of the house of the Duke of
Austria. I shall be told that the jousts of Suero de Quiñones, him of
the ‘Paso,’ and the emprise of Mosen Luis de Falces against the
Castilian knight, Don Gonzalo de Guzman, were mere mockeries; as well
as many other achievements of Christian knights of these and foreign
realms, which are so authentic and true, that, I repeat, he who denies
them must be totally wanting in reason and good sense.”

The canon was amazed to hear the medley of truth and fiction Don
Quixote uttered, and to see how well acquainted he was with everything
relating or belonging to the achievements of his knight-errantry; so he
said in reply:

“I cannot deny, Señor Don Quixote, that there is some truth in what you
say, especially as regards the Spanish knights-errant; and I am willing
to grant too that the Twelve Peers of France existed, but I am not
disposed to believe that they did all the things that the Archbishop
Turpin relates of them. For the truth of the matter is they were
knights chosen by the kings of France, and called ‘Peers’ because they
were all equal in worth, rank and prowess (at least if they were not
they ought to have been), and it was a kind of religious order like
those of Santiago and Calatrava in the present day, in which it is
assumed that those who take it are valiant knights of distinction and
good birth; and just as we say now a Knight of St. John, or of
Alcántara, they used to say then a Knight of the Twelve Peers, because
twelve equals were chosen for that military order. That there was a
Cid, as well as a Bernardo del Carpio, there can be no doubt; but that
they did the deeds people say they did, I hold to be very doubtful. In
that other matter of the pin o