ow, and ladies rode
behind their squires. This much at least I cannot help telling you,
that you may observe the good breeding and punctiliousness of my worthy
husband. As he was turning into the Calle de Santiago in Madrid, which
is rather narrow, one of the alcaldes of the Court, with two alguacils
before him, was coming out of it, and as soon as my good squire saw him
he wheeled his mule about and made as if he would turn and accompany
him. My lady, who was riding behind him, said to him in a low voice,
‘What are you about, you sneak, don’t you see that I am here?’ The
alcalde like a polite man pulled up his horse and said to him,
‘Proceed, señor, for it is I, rather, who ought to accompany my lady
Doña Casilda’—for that was my mistress’s name. Still my husband, cap in
hand, persisted in trying to accompany the alcalde, and seeing this my
lady, filled with rage and vexation, pulled out a big pin, or, I rather
think, a bodkin, out of her needle-case and drove it into his back with
such force that my husband gave a loud yell, and writhing fell to the
ground with his lady. Her two lacqueys ran to rise her up, and the
alcalde and the alguacils did the same; the Guadalajara gate was all in
commotion—I mean the idlers congregated there; my mistress came back on
foot, and my husband hurried away to a barber’s shop protesting that he
was run right through the guts. The courtesy of my husband was noised
abroad to such an extent, that the boys gave him no peace in the
street; and on this account, and because he was somewhat shortsighted,
my lady dismissed him; and it was chagrin at this I am convinced beyond
a doubt that brought on his death. I was left a helpless widow, with a
daughter on my hands growing up in beauty like the sea-foam; at length,
however, as I had the character of being an excellent needlewoman, my
lady the duchess, then lately married to my lord the duke, offered to
take me with her to this kingdom of Aragon, and my daughter also, and
here as time went by my daughter grew up and with her all the graces in
the world; she sings like a lark, dances quick as thought, foots it
like a gipsy, reads and writes like a schoolmaster, and does sums like
a miser; of her neatness I say nothing, for the running water is not
purer, and her age is now, if my memory serves me, sixteen years five
months and three days, one more or less. To come to the point, the son
of a very rich farmer, living in a village of my lord the duke’s not
very far from here, fell in love with this girl of mine; and in short,
how I know not, they came together, and under the promise of marrying
her he made a fool of my daughter, and will not keep his word. And
though my lord the duke is aware of it (for I have complained to him,
not once but many and many a time, and entreated him to order the
farmer to marry my daughter), he turns a deaf ear and will scarcely
listen to me; the reason being that as the deceiver’s father is so
rich, and lends him money, and is constantly going security for his
debts, he does not like to offend or annoy him in any way. Now, señor,
I want your worship to take it upon yourself to redress this wrong
either by entreaty or by arms; for by what all the world says you came
into it to redress grievances and right wrongs and help the
unfortunate. Let your worship put before you the unprotected condition
of my daughter, her youth, and all the perfections I have said she
possesses; and before God and on my conscience, out of all the damsels
my lady has, there is not one that comes up to the sole of her shoe,
and the one they call Altisidora, and look upon as the boldest and
gayest of them, put in comparison with my daughter, does not come
within two leagues of her. For I would have you know, señor, all is not
gold that glitters, and that same little Altisidora has more
forwardness than good looks, and more impudence than modesty; besides
being not very sound, for she has such a 