TLEMAN OF LA MANCHA




p16a.jpg (85K)

Full Size



Don Quixote pursued his journey in the high spirits, satisfaction, and
self-complacency already described, fancying himself the most valorous
knight-errant of the age in the world because of his late victory. All
the adventures that could befall him from that time forth he regarded
as already done and brought to a happy issue; he made light of
enchantments and enchanters; he thought no more of the countless
drubbings that had been administered to him in the course of his
knight-errantry, nor of the volley of stones that had levelled half his
teeth, nor of the ingratitude of the galley slaves, nor of the audacity
of the Yanguesans and the shower of stakes that fell upon him; in
short, he said to himself that could he discover any means, mode, or
way of disenchanting his lady Dulcinea, he would not envy the highest
fortune that the most fortunate knight-errant of yore ever reached or
could reach.

He was going along entirely absorbed in these fancies, when Sancho said
to him, “Isn’t it odd, señor, that I have still before my eyes that
monstrous enormous nose of my gossip, Tom Cecial?”

“And dost thou, then, believe, Sancho,” said Don Quixote, “that the
Knight of the Mirrors was the bachelor Carrasco, and his squire Tom
Cecial thy gossip?”

“I don’t know what to say to that,” replied Sancho; “all I know is that
the tokens he gave me about my own house, wife and children, nobody
else but himself could have given me; and the face, once the nose was
off, was the very face of Tom Cecial, as I have seen it many a time in
my town and next door to my own house; and the sound of the voice was
just the same.”

“Let us reason the matter, Sancho,” said Don Quixote. “Come now, by
what process of thinking can it be supposed that the bachelor Samson
Carrasco would come as a knight-errant, in arms offensive and
defensive, to fight with me? Have I ever been by any chance his enemy?
Have I ever given him any occasion to owe me a grudge? Am I his rival,
or does he profess arms, that he should envy the fame I have acquired
in them?”

“Well, but what are we to say, señor,” returned Sancho, “about that
knight, whoever he is, being so like the bachelor Carrasco, and his
squire so like my gossip, Tom Cecial? And if that be enchantment, as
your worship says, was there no other pair in the world for them to
take the likeness of?”

“It is all,” said Don Quixote, “a scheme and plot of the malignant
magicians that persecute me, who, foreseeing that I was to be
victorious in the conflict, arranged that the vanquished knight should
display the countenance of my friend the bachelor, in order that the
friendship I bear him should interpose to stay the edge of my sword and
might of my arm, and temper the just wrath of my heart; so that he who
sought to take my life by fraud and falsehood should save his own. And
to prove it, thou knowest already, Sancho, by experience which cannot
lie or deceive, how easy it is for enchanters to change one countenance
into another, turning fair into foul, and foul into fair; for it is not
two days since thou sawest with thine own eyes the beauty and elegance
of the peerless Dulcinea in all its perfection and natural harmony,
while I saw her in the repulsive and mean form of a coarse country
wench, with cataracts in her eyes and a foul smell in her mouth; and
when the perverse enchanter ventured to effect so wicked a
transformation, it is no wonder if he effected that of Samson Carrasco
and thy gossip in order to snatch the glory of victory out of my grasp.
For all that, however, I console myself, because, after all, in
whatever shape he may have been, I have been victorious over my enemy.”

“God knows what’s the truth of it all,” said Sancho; and knowing as he
did that the transformation of Dulcinea had been a device and
imposition of his own, his master’s illusions were not satisfactory to
him; but 