EVERAL UNFORTUNATES WHO
AGAINST THEIR WILL WERE BEING CARRIED WHERE THEY HAD NO WISH TO GO




c22a.jpg (178K)

Full Size




Cid Hamete Benengeli, the Arab and Manchegan author, relates in this
most grave, high-sounding, minute, delightful, and original history
that after the discussion between the famous Don Quixote of La Mancha
and his squire Sancho Panza which is set down at the end of chapter
twenty-one, Don Quixote raised his eyes and saw coming along the road
he was following some dozen men on foot strung together by the neck,
like beads, on a great iron chain, and all with manacles on their
hands. With them there came also two men on horseback and two on foot;
those on horseback with wheel-lock muskets, those on foot with javelins
and swords, and as soon as Sancho saw them he said:

“That is a chain of galley slaves, on the way to the galleys by force
of the king’s orders.”

“How by force?” asked Don Quixote; “is it possible that the king uses
force against anyone?”

“I do not say that,” answered Sancho, “but that these are people
condemned for their crimes to serve by force in the king’s galleys.”

“In fact,” replied Don Quixote, “however it may be, these people are
going where they are taking them by force, and not of their own will.”

“Just so,” said Sancho.

“Then if so,” said Don Quixote, “here is a case for the exercise of my
office, to put down force and to succour and help the wretched.”

“Recollect, your worship,” said Sancho, “Justice, which is the king
himself, is not using force or doing wrong to such persons, but
punishing them for their crimes.”

The chain of galley slaves had by this time come up, and Don Quixote in
very courteous language asked those who were in custody of it to be
good enough to tell him the reason or reasons for which they were
conducting these people in this manner. One of the guards on horseback
answered that they were galley slaves belonging to his majesty, that
they were going to the galleys, and that was all that was to be said
and all he had any business to know.



c22b.jpg (298K)

Full Size




“Nevertheless,” replied Don Quixote, “I should like to know from each
of them separately the reason of his misfortune;” to this he added more
to the same effect to induce them to tell him what he wanted so civilly
that the other mounted guard said to him:

“Though we have here the register and certificate of the sentence of
every one of these wretches, this is no time to take them out or read
them; come and ask themselves; they can tell if they choose, and they
will, for these fellows take a pleasure in doing and talking about
rascalities.”

With this permission, which Don Quixote would have taken even had they
not granted it, he approached the chain and asked the first for what
offences he was now in such a sorry case.

He made answer that it was for being a lover.

“For that only?” replied Don Quixote; “why, if for being lovers they
send people to the galleys I might have been rowing in them long ago.”

“The love is not the sort your worship is thinking of,” said the galley
slave; “mine was that I loved a washerwoman’s basket of clean linen so
well, and held it so close in my embrace, that if the arm of the law
had not forced it from me, I should never have let it go of my own will
to this moment; I was caught in the act, there was no occasion for
torture, the case was settled, they treated me to a hundred lashes on
the back, and three years of gurapas besides, and that was the end of
it.”

“What are gurapas?” asked Don Quixote.

“Gurapas are galleys,” answered the galley slave, who was a young man
of about four-and-twenty, and said he was a native of Piedrahita.

Don Quixote asked the same question of the second, who made no reply,
so downcast and melancholy was he; but the first answered for him, and
said, “He, sir, goes as a canary, I mean as a musician and a singer.”

“What!” said D