, and the lady Doña Belerma is what
_she_ is and has been, and that’s enough.’ To which he made answer,
‘Forgive me, Señor Don Quixote; I own I was wrong and spoke unadvisedly
in saying that the lady Dulcinea could scarcely come up to the lady
Belerma; for it were enough for me to have learned, by what means I
know not, that you are her knight, to make me bite my tongue out before
I compared her to anything save heaven itself.’ After this apology
which the great Montesinos made me, my heart recovered itself from the
shock I had received in hearing my lady compared with Belerma.”

“Still I wonder,” said Sancho, “that your worship did not get upon the
old fellow and bruise every bone of him with kicks, and pluck his beard
until you didn’t leave a hair in it.”

“Nay, Sancho, my friend,” said Don Quixote, “it would not have been
right in me to do that, for we are all bound to pay respect to the
aged, even though they be not knights, but especially to those who are,
and who are enchanted; I only know I gave him as good as he brought in
the many other questions and answers we exchanged.”

“I cannot understand, Señor Don Quixote,” remarked the cousin here,
“how it is that your worship, in such a short space of time as you have
been below there, could have seen so many things, and said and answered
so much.”

“How long is it since I went down?” asked Don Quixote.

“Little better than an hour,” replied Sancho.

“That cannot be,” returned Don Quixote, “because night overtook me
while I was there, and day came, and it was night again and day again
three times; so that, by my reckoning, I have been three days in those
remote regions beyond our ken.”

“My master must be right,” replied Sancho; “for as everything that has
happened to him is by enchantment, maybe what seems to us an hour would
seem three days and nights there.”

“That’s it,” said Don Quixote.

“And did your worship eat anything all that time, señor?” asked the
cousin.

“I never touched a morsel,” answered Don Quixote, “nor did I feel
hunger, or think of it.”

“And do the enchanted eat?” said the cousin.

“They neither eat,” said Don Quixote; “nor are they subject to the
greater excrements, though it is thought that their nails, beards, and
hair grow.”

“And do the enchanted sleep, now, señor?” asked Sancho.

“Certainly not,” replied Don Quixote; “at least, during those three
days I was with them not one of them closed an eye, nor did I either.”

“The proverb, ‘Tell me what company thou keepest and I’ll tell thee
what thou art,’ is to the point here,” said Sancho; “your worship keeps
company with enchanted people that are always fasting and watching;
what wonder is it, then, that you neither eat nor sleep while you are
with them? But forgive me, señor, if I say that of all this you have
told us now, may God take me—I was just going to say the devil—if I
believe a single particle.”

“What!” said the cousin, “has Señor Don Quixote, then, been lying? Why,
even if he wished it he has not had time to imagine and put together
such a host of lies.”

“I don’t believe my master lies,” said Sancho.

“If not, what dost thou believe?” asked Don Quixote.

“I believe,” replied Sancho, “that this Merlin, or those enchanters who
enchanted the whole crew your worship says you saw and discoursed with
down there, stuffed your imagination or your mind with all this
rigmarole you have been treating us to, and all that is still to come.”

“All that might be, Sancho,” replied Don Quixote; “but it is not so,
for everything that I have told you I saw with my own eyes, and touched
with my own hands. But what will you say when I tell you now how, among
the countless other marvellous things Montesinos showed me (of which at
leisure and at the proper time I will give thee an account in the
course of our journey, for they would not be all in place here), he
showed me three country girls who went skipping and capering like 