
for she who is queen of mine, the peerless Dulcinea del Toboso, suffers
none but hers to lead me captive and subdue me;” and so saying he sat
down on the floor in the middle of the room, tired out and broken down
by all this exertion in the dance.

Don Antonio directed him to be taken up bodily and carried to bed, and
the first that laid hold of him was Sancho, saying as he did so, “In an
evil hour you took to dancing, master mine; do you fancy all mighty men
of valour are dancers, and all knights-errant given to capering? If you
do, I can tell you you are mistaken; there’s many a man would rather
undertake to kill a giant than cut a caper. If it had been the
shoe-fling you were at I could take your place, for I can do the
shoe-fling like a gerfalcon; but I’m no good at dancing.”

With these and other observations Sancho set the whole ball-room
laughing, and then put his master to bed, covering him up well so that
he might sweat out any chill caught after his dancing.

The next day Don Antonio thought he might as well make trial of the
enchanted head, and with Don Quixote, Sancho, and two others, friends
of his, besides the two ladies that had tired out Don Quixote at the
ball, who had remained for the night with Don Antonio’s wife, he locked
himself up in the chamber where the head was. He explained to them the
property it possessed and entrusted the secret to them, telling them
that now for the first time he was going to try the virtue of the
enchanted head; but except Don Antonio’s two friends no one else was
privy to the mystery of the enchantment, and if Don Antonio had not
first revealed it to them they would have been inevitably reduced to
the same state of amazement as the rest, so artfully and skilfully was
it contrived.

The first to approach the ear of the head was Don Antonio himself, and
in a low voice but not so low as not to be audible to all, he said to
it, “Head, tell me by the virtue that lies in thee what am I at this
moment thinking of?”

The head, without any movement of the lips, answered in a clear and
distinct voice, so as to be heard by all, “I cannot judge of thoughts.”

All were thunderstruck at this, and all the more so as they saw that
there was nobody anywhere near the table or in the whole room that
could have answered. “How many of us are here?” asked Don Antonio once
more; and it was answered him in the same way softly, “Thou and thy
wife, with two friends of thine and two of hers, and a famous knight
called Don Quixote of La Mancha, and a squire of his, Sancho Panza by
name.”

Now there was fresh astonishment; now everyone’s hair was standing on
end with awe; and Don Antonio retiring from the head exclaimed, “This
suffices to show me that I have not been deceived by him who sold thee
to me, O sage head, talking head, answering head, wonderful head! Let
someone else go and put what question he likes to it.”

And as women are commonly impulsive and inquisitive, the first to come
forward was one of the two friends of Don Antonio’s wife, and her
question was, “Tell me, Head, what shall I do to be very beautiful?”
and the answer she got was, “Be very modest.”

“I question thee no further,” said the fair querist.

Her companion then came up and said, “I should like to know, Head,
whether my husband loves me or not;” the answer given to her was,
“Think how he uses thee, and thou mayest guess;” and the married lady
went off saying, “That answer did not need a question; for of course
the treatment one receives shows the disposition of him from whom it is
received.”

Then one of Don Antonio’s two friends advanced and asked it, “Who am
I?” “Thou knowest,” was the answer. “That is not what I ask thee,” said
the gentleman, “but to tell me if thou knowest me.” “Yes, I know thee,
thou art Don Pedro Noriz,” was the reply.

“I do not seek to know more,” said the gentleman, “for this is enough
to convince me, O Head, that thou knowest ev