for them.

By the time the book appeared he had left Spain, and, as fate ordered
it, for twelve years, the most eventful ones of his life. Giulio,
afterwards Cardinal, Acquaviva had been sent at the end of 1568 to
Philip II. by the Pope on a mission, partly of condolence, partly
political, and on his return to Rome, which was somewhat brusquely
expedited by the King, he took Cervantes with him as his camarero
(chamberlain), the office he himself held in the Pope’s household. The
post would no doubt have led to advancement at the Papal Court had
Cervantes retained it, but in the summer of 1570 he resigned it and
enlisted as a private soldier in Captain Diego Urbina’s company,
belonging to Don Miguel de Moncada’s regiment, but at that time forming
a part of the command of Marc Antony Colonna. What impelled him to this
step we know not, whether it was distaste for the career before him, or
purely military enthusiasm. It may well have been the latter, for it
was a stirring time; the events, however, which led to the alliance
between Spain, Venice, and the Pope, against the common enemy, the
Porte, and to the victory of the combined fleets at Lepanto, belong
rather to the history of Europe than to the life of Cervantes. He was
one of those that sailed from Messina, in September 1571, under the
command of Don John of Austria; but on the morning of the 7th of
October, when the Turkish fleet was sighted, he was lying below ill
with fever. At the news that the enemy was in sight he rose, and, in
spite of the remonstrances of his comrades and superiors, insisted on
taking his post, saying he preferred death in the service of God and
the King to health. His galley, the _Marquesa_, was in the thick of the
fight, and before it was over he had received three gunshot wounds, two
in the breast and one in the left hand or arm. On the morning after the
battle, according to Navarrete, he had an interview with the
commander-in-chief, Don John, who was making a personal inspection of
the wounded, one result of which was an addition of three crowns to his
pay, and another, apparently, the friendship of his general.

How severely Cervantes was wounded may be inferred from the fact, that
with youth, a vigorous frame, and as cheerful and buoyant a temperament
as ever invalid had, he was seven months in hospital at Messina before
he was discharged. He came out with his left hand permanently disabled;
he had lost the use of it, as Mercury told him in the “Viaje del
Parnaso” for the greater glory of the right. This, however, did not
absolutely unfit him for service, and in April 1572 he joined Manuel
Ponce de Leon’s company of Lope de Figueroa’s regiment, in which, it
seems probable, his brother Rodrigo was serving, and shared in the
operations of the next three years, including the capture of the
Goletta and Tunis. Taking advantage of the lull which followed the
recapture of these places by the Turks, he obtained leave to return to
Spain, and sailed from Naples in September 1575 on board the _Sun_
galley, in company with his brother Rodrigo, Pedro Carrillo de Quesada,
late Governor of the Goletta, and some others, and furnished with
letters from Don John of Austria and the Duke of Sesa, the Viceroy of
Sicily, recommending him to the King for the command of a company, on
account of his services; a _dono infelice_ as events proved. On the
26th they fell in with a squadron of Algerine galleys, and after a
stout resistance were overpowered and carried into Algiers.

By means of a ransomed fellow-captive the brothers contrived to inform
their family of their condition, and the poor people at Alcalá at once
strove to raise the ransom money, the father disposing of all he
possessed, and the two sisters giving up their marriage portions. But
Dali Mami had found on Cervantes the letters addressed to the King by
Don John and the Duke of Sesa, and, concluding that his prize must be a
person of great cons