, or bartered, or changed; for it is an inseparable accident
that lasts as long as life lasts; it is a noose that, once you put it
round your neck, turns into a Gordian knot, which, if the scythe of
Death does not cut it, there is no untying. I could say a great deal
more on this subject, were I not prevented by the anxiety I feel to
know if the señor licentiate has anything more to tell about the story
of Basilio.”

To this the student, bachelor, or, as Don Quixote called him,
licentiate, replied, “I have nothing whatever to say further, but that
from the moment Basilio learned that the fair Quiteria was to be
married to Camacho the rich, he has never been seen to smile, or heard
to utter rational word, and he always goes about moody and dejected,
talking to himself in a way that shows plainly he is out of his senses.
He eats little and sleeps little, and all he eats is fruit, and when he
sleeps, if he sleeps at all, it is in the field on the hard earth like
a brute beast. Sometimes he gazes at the sky, at other times he fixes
his eyes on the earth in such an abstracted way that he might be taken
for a clothed statue, with its drapery stirred by the wind. In short,
he shows such signs of a heart crushed by suffering, that all we who
know him believe that when to-morrow the fair Quiteria says ‘yes,’ it
will be his sentence of death.”

“God will guide it better,” said Sancho, “for God who gives the wound
gives the salve; nobody knows what will happen; there are a good many
hours between this and to-morrow, and any one of them, or any moment,
the house may fall; I have seen the rain coming down and the sun
shining all at one time; many a one goes to bed in good health who
can’t stir the next day. And tell me, is there anyone who can boast of
having driven a nail into the wheel of fortune? No, faith; and between
a woman’s ‘yes’ and ‘no’ I wouldn’t venture to put the point of a pin,
for there would not be room for it; if you tell me Quiteria loves
Basilio heart and soul, then I’ll give him a bag of good luck; for
love, I have heard say, looks through spectacles that make copper seem
gold, poverty wealth, and bleary eyes pearls.”

“What art thou driving at, Sancho? curses on thee!” said Don Quixote;
“for when thou takest to stringing proverbs and sayings together, no
one can understand thee but Judas himself, and I wish he had thee. Tell
me, thou animal, what dost thou know about nails or wheels, or anything
else?”

“Oh, if you don’t understand me,” replied Sancho, “it is no wonder my
words are taken for nonsense; but no matter; I understand myself, and I
know I have not said anything very foolish in what I have said; only
your worship, señor, is always gravelling at everything I say, nay,
everything I do.”

“Cavilling, not gravelling,” said Don Quixote, “thou prevaricator of
honest language, God confound thee!”

“Don’t find fault with me, your worship,” returned Sancho, “for you
know I have not been bred up at court or trained at Salamanca, to know
whether I am adding or dropping a letter or so in my words. Why! God
bless me, it’s not fair to force a Sayago-man to speak like a Toledan;
maybe there are Toledans who do not hit it off when it comes to
polished talk.”

“That is true,” said the licentiate, “for those who have been bred up
in the Tanneries and the Zocodover cannot talk like those who are
almost all day pacing the cathedral cloisters, and yet they are all
Toledans. Pure, correct, elegant and lucid language will be met with in
men of courtly breeding and discrimination, though they may have been
born in Majalahonda; I say of discrimination, because there are many
who are not so, and discrimination is the grammar of good language, if
it be accompanied by practice. I, sirs, for my sins have studied canon
law at Salamanca, and I rather pique myself on expressing my meaning in
clear, plain, and intelligible language.”

“If you did not pique yourself more on 