hose are the ones I mean,’ said I; ‘and see if they did not observe
the principles of art, and if, by observing them, they failed to show
their superiority and please all the world; so that the fault does not
lie with the public that insists upon nonsense, but with those who
don’t know how to produce something else. “The Ingratitude Revenged”
was not nonsense, nor was there any in “The Numantia,” nor any to be
found in “The Merchant Lover,” nor yet in “The Friendly Fair Foe,” nor
in some others that have been written by certain gifted poets, to their
own fame and renown, and to the profit of those that brought them out;’
some further remarks I added to these, with which, I think, I left him
rather dumbfoundered, but not so satisfied or convinced that I could
disabuse him of his error.”

“You have touched upon a subject, señor canon,” observed the curate
here, “that has awakened an old enmity I have against the plays in
vogue at the present day, quite as strong as that which I bear to the
books of chivalry; for while the drama, according to Tully, should be
the mirror of human life, the model of manners, and the image of the
truth, those which are presented now-a-days are mirrors of nonsense,
models of folly, and images of lewdness. For what greater nonsense can
there be in connection with what we are now discussing than for an
infant to appear in swaddling clothes in the first scene of the first
act, and in the second a grown-up bearded man? Or what greater
absurdity can there be than putting before us an old man as a
swashbuckler, a young man as a poltroon, a lackey using fine language,
a page giving sage advice, a king plying as a porter, a princess who is
a kitchen-maid? And then what shall I say of their attention to the
time in which the action they represent may or can take place, save
that I have seen a play where the first act began in Europe, the second
in Asia, the third finished in Africa, and no doubt, had it been in
four acts, the fourth would have ended in America, and so it would have
been laid in all four quarters of the globe? And if truth to life is
the main thing the drama should keep in view, how is it possible for
any average understanding to be satisfied when the action is supposed
to pass in the time of King Pepin or Charlemagne, and the principal
personage in it they represent to be the Emperor Heraclius who entered
Jerusalem with the cross and won the Holy Sepulchre, like Godfrey of
Bouillon, there being years innumerable between the one and the other?
or, if the play is based on fiction and historical facts are
introduced, or bits of what occurred to different people and at
different times mixed up with it, all, not only without any semblance
of probability, but with obvious errors that from every point of view
are inexcusable? And the worst of it is, there are ignorant people who
say that this is perfection, and that anything beyond this is affected
refinement. And then if we turn to sacred dramas—what miracles they
invent in them! What apocryphal, ill-devised incidents, attributing to
one saint the miracles of another! And even in secular plays they
venture to introduce miracles without any reason or object except that
they think some such miracle, or transformation as they call it, will
come in well to astonish stupid people and draw them to the play. All
this tends to the prejudice of the truth and the corruption of history,
nay more, to the reproach of the wits of Spain; for foreigners who
scrupulously observe the laws of the drama look upon us as barbarous
and ignorant, when they see the absurdity and nonsense of the plays we
produce. Nor will it be a sufficient excuse to say that the chief
object well-ordered governments have in view when they permit plays to
be performed in public is to entertain the people with some harmless
amusement occasionally, and keep it from those evil humours which
idleness is apt to engender; and that, as this