her some forty gold crowns, and would not permit his men to take from
her those same garments which she has on now. We got into the boat,
returning them thanks for their kindness to us, and showing ourselves
grateful rather than indignant. They stood out to sea, steering for the
straits; we, without looking to any compass save the land we had before
us, set ourselves to row with such energy that by sunset we were so
near that we might easily, we thought, land before the night was far
advanced. But as the moon did not show that night, and the sky was
clouded, and as we knew not whereabouts we were, it did not seem to us
a prudent thing to make for the shore, as several of us advised, saying
we ought to run ourselves ashore even if it were on rocks and far from
any habitation, for in this way we should be relieved from the
apprehensions we naturally felt of the prowling vessels of the Tetuan
corsairs, who leave Barbary at nightfall and are on the Spanish coast
by daybreak, where they commonly take some prize, and then go home to
sleep in their own houses. But of the conflicting counsels the one
which was adopted was that we should approach gradually, and land where
we could if the sea were calm enough to permit us. This was done, and a
little before midnight we drew near to the foot of a huge and lofty
mountain, not so close to the sea but that it left a narrow space on
which to land conveniently. We ran our boat up on the sand, and all
sprang out and kissed the ground, and with tears of joyful satisfaction
returned thanks to God our Lord for all his incomparable goodness to us
on our voyage. We took out of the boat the provisions it contained, and
drew it up on the shore, and then climbed a long way up the mountain,
for even there we could not feel easy in our hearts, or persuade
ourselves that it was Christian soil that was now under our feet.

The dawn came, more slowly, I think, than we could have wished; we
completed the ascent in order to see if from the summit any habitation
or any shepherds’ huts could be discovered, but strain our eyes as we
might, neither dwelling, nor human being, nor path nor road could we
perceive. However, we determined to push on farther, as it could not
but be that ere long we must see someone who could tell us where we
were. But what distressed me most was to see Zoraida going on foot over
that rough ground; for though I once carried her on my shoulders, she
was more wearied by my weariness than rested by the rest; and so she
would never again allow me to undergo the exertion, and went on very
patiently and cheerfully, while I led her by the hand. We had gone
rather less than a quarter of a league when the sound of a little bell
fell on our ears, a clear proof that there were flocks hard by, and
looking about carefully to see if any were within view, we observed a
young shepherd tranquilly and unsuspiciously trimming a stick with his
knife at the foot of a cork tree. We called to him, and he, raising his
head, sprang nimbly to his feet, for, as we afterwards learned, the
first who presented themselves to his sight were the renegade and
Zoraida, and seeing them in Moorish dress he imagined that all the
Moors of Barbary were upon him; and plunging with marvellous swiftness
into the thicket in front of him, he began to raise a prodigious
outcry, exclaiming, “The Moors—the Moors have landed! To arms, to
arms!” We were all thrown into perplexity by these cries, not knowing
what to do; but reflecting that the shouts of the shepherd would raise
the country and that the mounted coast-guard would come at once to see
what was the matter, we agreed that the renegade must strip off his
Turkish garments and put on a captive’s jacket or coat which one of our
party gave him at once, though he himself was reduced to his shirt; and
so commending ourselves to God, we followed the same road which we saw
the shepherd take, expecting every moment that the coas