o my care and God’s, who always supports
good intentions.”

Anselmo had with the deepest attention listened to and seen played out
the tragedy of the death of his honour, which the performers acted with
such wonderfully effective truth that it seemed as if they had become
the realities of the parts they played. He longed for night and an
opportunity of escaping from the house to go and see his good friend
Lothario, and with him give vent to his joy over the precious pearl he
had gained in having established his wife’s purity. Both mistress and
maid took care to give him time and opportunity to get away, and taking
advantage of it he made his escape, and at once went in quest of
Lothario, and it would be impossible to describe how he embraced him
when he found him, and the things he said to him in the joy of his
heart, and the praises he bestowed upon Camilla; all which Lothario
listened to without being able to show any pleasure, for he could not
forget how deceived his friend was, and how dishonourably he had
wronged him; and though Anselmo could see that Lothario was not glad,
still he imagined it was only because he had left Camilla wounded and
had been himself the cause of it; and so among other things he told him
not to be distressed about Camilla’s accident, for, as they had agreed
to hide it from him, the wound was evidently trifling; and that being
so, he had no cause for fear, but should henceforward be of good cheer
and rejoice with him, seeing that by his means and adroitness he found
himself raised to the greatest height of happiness that he could have
ventured to hope for, and desired no better pastime than making verses
in praise of Camilla that would preserve her name for all time to come.
Lothario commended his purpose, and promised on his own part to aid him
in raising a monument so glorious.

And so Anselmo was left the most charmingly hoodwinked man there could
be in the world. He himself, persuaded he was conducting the instrument
of his glory, led home by the hand of him who had been the utter
destruction of his good name; whom Camilla received with averted
countenance, though with smiles in her heart. The deception was carried
on for some time, until at the end of a few months Fortune turned her
wheel and the guilt which had been until then so skilfully concealed
was published abroad, and Anselmo paid with his life the penalty of his
ill-advised curiosity.



CHAPTER XXXV.
WHICH TREATS OF THE HEROIC AND PRODIGIOUS BATTLE DON QUIXOTE HAD WITH
CERTAIN SKINS OF RED WINE, AND BRINGS THE NOVEL OF “THE ILL-ADVISED
CURIOSITY” TO A CLOSE

There remained but little more of the novel to be read, when Sancho
Panza burst forth in wild excitement from the garret where Don Quixote
was lying, shouting, “Run, sirs! quick; and help my master, who is in
the thick of the toughest and stiffest battle I ever laid eyes on. By
the living God he has given the giant, the enemy of my lady the
Princess Micomicona, such a slash that he has sliced his head clean off
as if it were a turnip.”

“What are you talking about, brother?” said the curate, pausing as he
was about to read the remainder of the novel. “Are you in your senses,
Sancho? How the devil can it be as you say, when the giant is two
thousand leagues away?”

Here they heard a loud noise in the chamber, and Don Quixote shouting
out, “Stand, thief, brigand, villain; now I have got thee, and thy
scimitar shall not avail thee!” And then it seemed as though he were
slashing vigorously at the wall.

“Don’t stop to listen,” said Sancho, “but go in and part them or help
my master: though there is no need of that now, for no doubt the giant
is dead by this time and giving account to God of his past wicked life;
for I saw the blood flowing on the ground, and the head cut off and
fallen on one side, and it is as big as a large wine-skin.”

“May I die,” said the landlord at this, “if Don Quixote or Don Devil
has n