ed to me to fly rather than gallop; so you
needn’t try to sell me the cat for the hare, showing me here a noseless
Melisendra when she is now, may be, enjoying herself at her ease with
her husband in France. God help every one to his own, Master Pedro, and
let us all proceed fairly and honestly; and now go on.”

Master Pedro, perceiving that Don Quixote was beginning to wander, and
return to his original fancy, was not disposed to let him escape, so he
said to him, “This cannot be Melisendra, but must be one of the damsels
that waited on her; so if I’m given sixty maravedis for her, I’ll be
content and sufficiently paid.”

And so he went on, putting values on ever so many more smashed figures,
which, after the two arbitrators had adjusted them to the satisfaction
of both parties, came to forty reals and three-quarters; and over and
above this sum, which Sancho at once disbursed, Master Pedro asked for
two reals for his trouble in catching the ape.

“Let him have them, Sancho,” said Don Quixote; “not to catch the ape,
but to get drunk; and two hundred would I give this minute for the good
news, to anyone who could tell me positively, that the lady Doña
Melisandra and Señor Don Gaiferos were now in France and with their own
people.”

“No one could tell us that better than my ape,” said Master Pedro; “but
there’s no devil that could catch him now; I suspect, however, that
affection and hunger will drive him to come looking for me to-night;
but to-morrow will soon be here and we shall see.”

In short, the puppet-show storm passed off, and all supped in peace and
good fellowship at Don Quixote’s expense, for he was the height of
generosity. Before it was daylight the man with the lances and halberds
took his departure, and soon after daybreak the cousin and the page
came to bid Don Quixote farewell, the former returning home, the latter
resuming his journey, towards which, to help him, Don Quixote gave him
twelve reals. Master Pedro did not care to engage in any more palaver
with Don Quixote, whom he knew right well; so he rose before the sun,
and having got together the remains of his show and caught his ape, he
too went off to seek his adventures. The landlord, who did not know Don
Quixote, was as much astonished at his mad freaks as at his generosity.
To conclude, Sancho, by his master’s orders, paid him very liberally,
and taking leave of him they quitted the inn at about eight in the
morning and took to the road, where we will leave them to pursue their
journey, for this is necessary in order to allow certain other matters
to be set forth, which are required to clear up this famous history.



p26e.jpg (34K)



CHAPTER XXVII.
WHEREIN IT IS SHOWN WHO MASTER PEDRO AND HIS APE WERE, TOGETHER WITH
THE MISHAP DON QUIXOTE HAD IN THE BRAYING ADVENTURE, WHICH HE DID NOT
CONCLUDE AS HE WOULD HAVE LIKED OR AS HE HAD EXPECTED




p27a.jpg (135K)

Full Size



Cide Hamete, the chronicler of this great history, begins this chapter
with these words, “I swear as a Catholic Christian;” with regard to
which his translator says that Cide Hamete’s swearing as a Catholic
Christian, he being—as no doubt he was—a Moor, only meant that, just as
a Catholic Christian taking an oath swears, or ought to swear, what is
true, and tell the truth in what he avers, so he was telling the truth,
as much as if he swore as a Catholic Christian, in all he chose to
write about Quixote, especially in declaring who Master Pedro was and
what was the divining ape that astonished all the villages with his
divinations. He says, then, that he who has read the First Part of this
history will remember well enough the Gines de Pasamonte whom, with
other galley slaves, Don Quixote set free in the Sierra Morena: a
kindness for which he afterwards got poor thanks and worse payment from
that evil-minded, ill-conditioned set. This Gines de Pasamonte—Don
Ginesillo de Parapilla, Don Quixote called him—