d above what Tom
Carrasco gave thee?”

“I think,” said Sancho, “that if your worship was to add on two reals a
month I’d consider myself well paid; that is, as far as the wages of my
labour go; but to make up to me for your worship’s pledge and promise
to me to give me the government of an island, it would be fair to add
six reals more, making thirty in all.”

“Very good,” said Don Quixote; “it is twenty-five days since we left
our village, so reckon up, Sancho, according to the wages you have made
out for yourself, and see how much I owe you in proportion, and pay
yourself, as I said before, out of your own hand.”

“O body o’ me!” said Sancho, “but your worship is very much out in that
reckoning; for when it comes to the promise of the island we must count
from the day your worship promised it to me to this present hour we are
at now.”

“Well, how long is it, Sancho, since I promised it to you?” said Don
Quixote.

“If I remember rightly,” said Sancho, “it must be over twenty years,
three days more or less.”

Don Quixote gave himself a great slap on the forehead and began to
laugh heartily, and said he, “Why, I have not been wandering, either in
the Sierra Morena or in the whole course of our sallies, but barely two
months, and thou sayest, Sancho, that it is twenty years since I
promised thee the island. I believe now thou wouldst have all the money
thou hast of mine go in thy wages. If so, and if that be thy pleasure,
I give it to thee now, once and for all, and much good may it do thee,
for so long as I see myself rid of such a good-for-nothing squire I’ll
be glad to be left a pauper without a rap. But tell me, thou perverter
of the squirely rules of knight-errantry, where hast thou ever seen or
read that any knight-errant’s squire made terms with his lord, ‘you
must give me so much a month for serving you’? Plunge, scoundrel,
rogue, monster—for such I take thee to be—plunge, I say, into the _mare
magnum_ of their histories; and if thou shalt find that any squire ever
said or thought what thou hast said now, I will let thee nail it on my
forehead, and give me, over and above, four sound slaps in the face.
Turn the rein, or the halter, of thy Dapple, and begone home; for one
single step further thou shalt not make in my company. O bread
thanklessly received! O promises ill-bestowed! O man more beast than
human being! Now, when I was about to raise thee to such a position,
that, in spite of thy wife, they would call thee ‘my lord,’ thou art
leaving me? Thou art going now when I had a firm and fixed intention of
making thee lord of the best island in the world? Well, as thou thyself
hast said before now, honey is not for the mouth of the ass. Ass thou
art, ass thou wilt be, and ass thou wilt end when the course of thy
life is run; for I know it will come to its close before thou dost
perceive or discern that thou art a beast.”

Sancho regarded Don Quixote earnestly while he was giving him this
rating, and was so touched by remorse that the tears came to his eyes,
and in a piteous and broken voice he said to him, “Master mine, I
confess that, to be a complete ass, all I want is a tail; if your
worship will only fix one on to me, I’ll look on it as rightly placed,
and I’ll serve you as an ass all the remaining days of my life. Forgive
me and have pity on my folly, and remember I know but little, and, if I
talk much, it’s more from infirmity than malice; but he who sins and
mends commends himself to God.”

“I should have been surprised, Sancho,” said Don Quixote, “if thou
hadst not introduced some bit of a proverb into thy speech. Well, well,
I forgive thee, provided thou dost mend and not show thyself in future
so fond of thine own interest, but try to be of good cheer and take
heart, and encourage thyself to look forward to the fulfillment of my
promises, which, by being delayed, does not become impossible.”

Sancho said he would do so, and keep up his heart 