 to take the road with a sunshade if the government only
lasts him two months more.”

The curate and the bachelor could see plainly enough that the page
spoke in a waggish vein; but the fineness of the coral beads, and the
hunting suit that Sancho sent (for Teresa had already shown it to them)
did away with the impression; and they could not help laughing at
Sanchica’s wish, and still more when Teresa said, “Señor curate, look
about if there’s anybody here going to Madrid or Toledo, to buy me a
hooped petticoat, a proper fashionable one of the best quality; for
indeed and indeed I must do honour to my husband’s government as well
as I can; nay, if I am put to it and have to, I’ll go to Court and set
a coach like all the world; for she who has a governor for her husband
may very well have one and keep one.”

“And why not, mother!” said Sanchica; “would to God it were to-day
instead of to-morrow, even though they were to say when they saw me
seated in the coach with my mother, ‘See that rubbish, that
garlic-stuffed fellow’s daughter, how she goes stretched at her ease in
a coach as if she was a she-pope!’ But let them tramp through the mud,
and let me go in my coach with my feet off the ground. Bad luck to
backbiters all over the world; ‘let me go warm and the people may
laugh.’ Do I say right, mother?”

“To be sure you do, my child,” said Teresa; “and all this good luck,
and even more, my good Sancho foretold me; and thou wilt see, my
daughter, he won’t stop till he has made me a countess; for to make a
beginning is everything in luck; and as I have heard thy good father
say many a time (for besides being thy father he’s the father of
proverbs too), ‘When they offer thee a heifer, run with a halter; when
they offer thee a government, take it; when they would give thee a
county, seize it; when they say, “Here, here!” to thee with something
good, swallow it.’ Oh no! go to sleep, and don’t answer the strokes of
good fortune and the lucky chances that are knocking at the door of
your house!”

“And what do I care,” added Sanchica, “whether anybody says when he
sees me holding my head up, ‘The dog saw himself in hempen breeches,’
and the rest of it?”

Hearing this the curate said, “I do believe that all this family of the
Panzas are born with a sackful of proverbs in their insides, every one
of them; I never saw one of them that does not pour them out at all
times and on all occasions.”

“That is true,” said the page, “for Señor Governor Sancho utters them
at every turn; and though a great many of them are not to the purpose,
still they amuse one, and my lady the duchess and the duke praise them
highly.”

“Then you still maintain that all this about Sancho’s government is
true, señor,” said the bachelor, “and that there actually is a duchess
who sends him presents and writes to him? Because we, although we have
handled the present and read the letters, don’t believe it and suspect
it to be something in the line of our fellow-townsman Don Quixote, who
fancies that everything is done by enchantment; and for this reason I
am almost ready to say that I’d like to touch and feel your worship to
see whether you are a mere ambassador of the imagination or a man of
flesh and blood.”

“All I know, sirs,” replied the page, “is that I am a real ambassador,
and that Señor Sancho Panza is governor as a matter of fact, and that
my lord and lady the duke and duchess can give, and have given him this
same government, and that I have heard it said Sancho Panza bears
himself very stoutly therein; whether there be any enchantment in all
this or not, it is for your worships to settle between you; for that’s
all I know by the oath I swear, and that is by the life of my parents
whom I have still alive, and love dearly.”

“It may be so,” said the bachelor; “but _dubitat Augustinus_.”

“Doubt who will,” said the page; “what I have told you is the truth,
and that will always rise above fa