THE BRISTLY ADVENTURE THAT BEFELL DON QUIXOTE




p68a.jpg (119K)

Full Size



The night was somewhat dark, for though there was a moon in the sky it
was not in a quarter where she could be seen; for sometimes the lady
Diana goes on a stroll to the antipodes, and leaves the mountains all
black and the valleys in darkness. Don Quixote obeyed nature so far as
to sleep his first sleep, but did not give way to the second, very
different from Sancho, who never had any second, because with him sleep
lasted from night till morning, wherein he showed what a sound
constitution and few cares he had. Don Quixote’s cares kept him
restless, so much so that he awoke Sancho and said to him, “I am
amazed, Sancho, at the unconcern of thy temperament. I believe thou art
made of marble or hard brass, incapable of any emotion or feeling
whatever. I lie awake while thou sleepest, I weep while thou singest, I
am faint with fasting while thou art sluggish and torpid from pure
repletion. It is the duty of good servants to share the sufferings and
feel the sorrows of their masters, if it be only for the sake of
appearances. See the calmness of the night, the solitude of the spot,
inviting us to break our slumbers by a vigil of some sort. Rise as thou
livest, and retire a little distance, and with a good heart and
cheerful courage give thyself three or four hundred lashes on account
of Dulcinea’s disenchantment score; and this I entreat of thee, making
it a request, for I have no desire to come to grips with thee a second
time, as I know thou hast a heavy hand. As soon as thou hast laid them
on we will pass the rest of the night, I singing my separation, thou
thy constancy, making a beginning at once with the pastoral life we are
to follow at our village.”

“Señor,” replied Sancho, “I’m no monk to get up out of the middle of my
sleep and scourge myself, nor does it seem to me that one can pass from
one extreme of the pain of whipping to the other of music. Will your
worship let me sleep, and not worry me about whipping myself? or you’ll
make me swear never to touch a hair of my doublet, not to say my
flesh.”

“O hard heart!” said Don Quixote, “O pitiless squire! O bread
ill-bestowed and favours ill-acknowledged, both those I have done thee
and those I mean to do thee! Through me hast thou seen thyself a
governor, and through me thou seest thyself in immediate expectation of
being a count, or obtaining some other equivalent title, for I—_post
tenebras spero lucem_.”

“I don’t know what that is,” said Sancho; “all I know is that so long
as I am asleep I have neither fear nor hope, trouble nor glory; and
good luck betide him that invented sleep, the cloak that covers over
all a man’s thoughts, the food that removes hunger, the drink that
drives away thirst, the fire that warms the cold, the cold that tempers
the heat, and, to wind up with, the universal coin wherewith everything
is bought, the weight and balance that makes the shepherd equal with
the king and the fool with the wise man. Sleep, I have heard say, has
only one fault, that it is like death; for between a sleeping man and a
dead man there is very little difference.”

“Never have I heard thee speak so elegantly as now, Sancho,” said Don
Quixote; “and here I begin to see the truth of the proverb thou dost
sometimes quote, ‘Not with whom thou art bred, but with whom thou art
fed.’”

“Ha, by my life, master mine,” said Sancho, “it’s not I that am
stringing proverbs now, for they drop in pairs from your worship’s
mouth faster than from mine; only there is this difference between mine
and yours, that yours are well-timed and mine are untimely; but anyhow,
they are all proverbs.”

At this point they became aware of a harsh indistinct noise that seemed
to spread through all the valleys around. Don Quixote stood up and laid
his hand upon his sword, and Sancho ensconced himself under Dapple and
put the bundle of armour on one s