nd.”

“I thank thee for thy good intentions, friend Sancho,” answered Don
Quixote, “but I would have thee know that all these things I am doing
are not in joke, but very much in earnest, for anything else would be a
transgression of the ordinances of chivalry, which forbid us to tell
any lie whatever under the penalties due to apostasy; and to do one
thing instead of another is just the same as lying; so my knocks on the
head must be real, solid, and valid, without anything sophisticated or
fanciful about them, and it will be needful to leave me some lint to
dress my wounds, since fortune has compelled us to do without the
balsam we lost.”

“It was worse losing the ass,” replied Sancho, “for with him lint and
all were lost; but I beg of your worship not to remind me again of that
accursed liquor, for my soul, not to say my stomach, turns at hearing
the very name of it; and I beg of you, too, to reckon as past the three
days you allowed me for seeing the mad things you do, for I take them
as seen already and pronounced upon, and I will tell wonderful stories
to my lady; so write the letter and send me off at once, for I long to
return and take your worship out of this purgatory where I am leaving
you.”

“Purgatory dost thou call it, Sancho?” said Don Quixote, “rather call
it hell, or even worse if there be anything worse.”

“For one who is in hell,” said Sancho, “_nulla est retentio_, as I have
heard say.”

“I do not understand what _retentio_ means,” said Don Quixote.

“_Retentio_,” answered Sancho, “means that whoever is in hell never
comes nor can come out of it, which will be the opposite case with your
worship or my legs will be idle, that is if I have spurs to enliven
Rocinante: let me once get to El Toboso and into the presence of my
lady Dulcinea, and I will tell her such things of the follies and
madnesses (for it is all one) that your worship has done and is still
doing, that I will manage to make her softer than a glove though I find
her harder than a cork tree; and with her sweet and honeyed answer I
will come back through the air like a witch, and take your worship out
of this purgatory that seems to be hell but is not, as there is hope of
getting out of it; which, as I have said, those in hell have not, and I
believe your worship will not say anything to the contrary.”

“That is true,” said he of the Rueful Countenance, “but how shall we
manage to write the letter?”

“And the ass-colt order too,” added Sancho.

“All shall be included,” said Don Quixote; “and as there is no paper,
it would be well done to write it on the leaves of trees, as the
ancients did, or on tablets of wax; though that would be as hard to
find just now as paper. But it has just occurred to me how it may be
conveniently and even more than conveniently written, and that is in
the notebook that belonged to Cardenio, and thou wilt take care to have
it copied on paper, in a good hand, at the first village thou comest to
where there is a schoolmaster, or if not, any sacristan will copy it;
but see thou give it not to any notary to copy, for they write a law
hand that Satan could not make out.”

“But what is to be done about the signature?” said Sancho.

“The letters of Amadis were never signed,” said Don Quixote.

“That is all very well,” said Sancho, “but the order must needs be
signed, and if it is copied they will say the signature is false, and I
shall be left without ass-colts.”

“The order shall go signed in the same book,” said Don Quixote, “and on
seeing it my niece will make no difficulty about obeying it; as to the
loveletter thou canst put by way of signature, ‘_Yours till death, the
Knight of the Rueful Countenance._’ And it will be no great matter if
it is in some other person’s hand, for as well as I recollect Dulcinea
can neither read nor write, nor in the whole course of her life has she
seen handwriting or letter of mine, for my love and hers have been
alway