ed.”

“I’ll lay a bet,” said Sancho, “that before long there won’t be a
tavern, roadside inn, hostelry, or barber’s shop where the story of our
doings won’t be painted up; but I’d like it painted by the hand of a
better painter than painted these.”

“Thou art right, Sancho,” said Don Quixote, “for this painter is like
Orbaneja, a painter there was at Úbeda, who when they asked him what he
was painting, used to say, ‘Whatever it may turn out; and if he chanced
to paint a cock he would write under it, ‘This is a cock,’ for fear
they might think it was a fox. The painter or writer, for it’s all the
same, who published the history of this new Don Quixote that has come
out, must have been one of this sort I think, Sancho, for he painted or
wrote ‘whatever it might turn out;’ or perhaps he is like a poet called
Mauleon that was about the Court some years ago, who used to answer at
haphazard whatever he was asked, and on one asking him what _Deum de
Deo_ meant, he replied _Dé donde diere_. But, putting this aside, tell
me, Sancho, hast thou a mind to have another turn at thyself to-night,
and wouldst thou rather have it indoors or in the open air?”

“Egad, señor,” said Sancho, “for what I’m going to give myself, it
comes all the same to me whether it is in a house or in the fields;
still I’d like it to be among trees; for I think they are company for
me and help me to bear my pain wonderfully.”

“And yet it must not be, Sancho my friend,” said Don Quixote; “but, to
enable thee to recover strength, we must keep it for our own village;
for at the latest we shall get there the day after to-morrow.”

Sancho said he might do as he pleased; but that for his own part he
would like to finish off the business quickly before his blood cooled
and while he had an appetite, because “in delay there is apt to be
danger” very often, and “praying to God and plying the hammer,” and
“one take was better than two I’ll give thee’s,” and “a sparrow in the
hand than a vulture on the wing.”

“For God’s sake, Sancho, no more proverbs!” exclaimed Don Quixote; “it
seems to me thou art becoming _sicut erat_ again; speak in a plain,
simple, straight-forward way, as I have often told thee, and thou wilt
find the good of it.”

“I don’t know what bad luck it is of mine,” said Sancho, “but I can’t
utter a word without a proverb that is not as good as an argument to my
mind; however, I mean to mend if I can;” and so for the present the
conversation ended.



p71e.jpg (42K)



CHAPTER LXXII.
OF HOW DON QUIXOTE AND SANCHO REACHED THEIR VILLAGE




p72a.jpg (155K)

Full Size



All that day Don Quixote and Sancho remained in the village and inn
waiting for night, the one to finish off his task of scourging in the
open country, the other to see it accomplished, for therein lay the
accomplishment of his wishes. Meanwhile there arrived at the hostelry a
traveller on horseback with three or four servants, one of whom said to
him who appeared to be the master, “Here, Señor Don Álvaro Tarfe, your
worship may take your siesta to-day; the quarters seem clean and cool.”

When he heard this Don Quixote said to Sancho, “Look here, Sancho; on
turning over the leaves of that book of the Second Part of my history I
think I came casually upon this name of Don Álvaro Tarfe.”

“Very likely,” said Sancho; “we had better let him dismount, and
by-and-by we can ask about it.”

The gentleman dismounted, and the landlady gave him a room on the
ground floor opposite Don Quixote’s and adorned with painted serge
hangings of the same sort. The newly arrived gentleman put on a summer
coat, and coming out to the gateway of the hostelry, which was wide and
cool, addressing Don Quixote, who was pacing up and down there, he
asked, “In what direction is your worship bound, gentle sir?”

“To a village near this which is my own village,” replied Don Quixote;
“and your worship, where are you bound for?”

“I am going 