
IN WHICH IS CONTINUED THE NOVEL OF “THE ILL-ADVISED CURIOSITY”

“It is commonly said that an army looks ill without its general and a
castle without its castellan, and I say that a young married woman
looks still worse without her husband unless there are very good
reasons for it. I find myself so ill at ease without you, and so
incapable of enduring this separation, that unless you return quickly I
shall have to go for relief to my parents’ house, even if I leave yours
without a protector; for the one you left me, if indeed he deserved
that title, has, I think, more regard to his own pleasure than to what
concerns you: as you are possessed of discernment I need say no more to
you, nor indeed is it fitting I should say more.”

Anselmo received this letter, and from it he gathered that Lothario had
already begun his task and that Camilla must have replied to him as he
would have wished; and delighted beyond measure at such intelligence he
sent word to her not to leave his house on any account, as he would
very shortly return. Camilla was astonished at Anselmo’s reply, which
placed her in greater perplexity than before, for she neither dared to
remain in her own house, nor yet to go to her parents’; for in
remaining her virtue was imperilled, and in going she was opposing her
husband’s commands. Finally she decided upon what was the worse course
for her, to remain, resolving not to fly from the presence of Lothario,
that she might not give food for gossip to her servants; and she now
began to regret having written as she had to her husband, fearing he
might imagine that Lothario had perceived in her some lightness which
had impelled him to lay aside the respect he owed her; but confident of
her rectitude she put her trust in God and in her own virtuous
intentions, with which she hoped to resist in silence all the
solicitations of Lothario, without saying anything to her husband so as
not to involve him in any quarrel or trouble; and she even began to
consider how to excuse Lothario to Anselmo when he should ask her what
it was that induced her to write that letter. With these resolutions,
more honourable than judicious or effectual, she remained the next day
listening to Lothario, who pressed his suit so strenuously that
Camilla’s firmness began to waver, and her virtue had enough to do to
come to the rescue of her eyes and keep them from showing signs of a
certain tender compassion which the tears and appeals of Lothario had
awakened in her bosom. Lothario observed all this, and it inflamed him
all the more. In short he felt that while Anselmo’s absence afforded
time and opportunity he must press the siege of the fortress, and so he
assailed her self-esteem with praises of her beauty, for there is
nothing that more quickly reduces and levels the castle towers of fair
women’s vanity than vanity itself upon the tongue of flattery. In fact
with the utmost assiduity he undermined the rock of her purity with
such engines that had Camilla been of brass she must have fallen. He
wept, he entreated, he promised, he flattered, he importuned, he
pretended with so much feeling and apparent sincerity, that he
overthrew the virtuous resolves of Camilla and won the triumph he least
expected and most longed for. Camilla yielded, Camilla fell; but what
wonder if the friendship of Lothario could not stand firm? A clear
proof to us that the passion of love is to be conquered only by flying
from it, and that no one should engage in a struggle with an enemy so
mighty; for divine strength is needed to overcome his human power.
Leonela alone knew of her mistress’s weakness, for the two false
friends and new lovers were unable to conceal it. Lothario did not care
to tell Camilla the object Anselmo had in view, nor that he had
afforded him the opportunity of attaining such a result, lest she
should undervalue his love and think that it was by chance and without
intending it and not of his own 