 will prove haughty
or insensible, or that he will not know how to estimate the accidents
of fortune at their proper value.”

“Still,” said the captain, “I would not make myself known abruptly, but
in some indirect way.”

“I have told you already,” said the curate, “that I will manage it in a
way to satisfy us all.”

By this time supper was ready, and they all took their seats at the
table, except the captive, and the ladies, who supped by themselves in
their own room. In the middle of supper the curate said:

“I had a comrade of your worship’s name, Señor Judge, in
Constantinople, where I was a captive for several years, and that same
comrade was one of the stoutest soldiers and captains in the whole
Spanish infantry; but he had as large a share of misfortune as he had
of gallantry and courage.”

“And how was the captain called, señor?” asked the Judge.

“He was called Ruy Perez de Viedma,” replied the curate, “and he was
born in a village in the mountains of Leon; and he mentioned a
circumstance connected with his father and his brothers which, had it
not been told me by so truthful a man as he was, I should have set down
as one of those fables the old women tell over the fire in winter; for
he said his father had divided his property among his three sons and
had addressed words of advice to them sounder than any of Cato’s. But I
can say this much, that the choice he made of going to the wars was
attended with such success, that by his gallant conduct and courage,
and without any help save his own merit, he rose in a few years to be
captain of infantry, and to see himself on the high-road and in
position to be given the command of a corps before long; but Fortune
was against him, for where he might have expected her favour he lost
it, and with it his liberty, on that glorious day when so many
recovered theirs, at the battle of Lepanto. I lost mine at the Goletta,
and after a variety of adventures we found ourselves comrades at
Constantinople. Thence he went to Algiers, where he met with one of the
most extraordinary adventures that ever befell anyone in the world.”

Here the curate went on to relate briefly his brother’s adventure with
Zoraida; to all which the Judge gave such an attentive hearing that he
never before had been so much of a hearer. The curate, however, only
went so far as to describe how the Frenchmen plundered those who were
in the boat, and the poverty and distress in which his comrade and the
fair Moor were left, of whom he said he had not been able to learn what
became of them, or whether they had reached Spain, or been carried to
France by the Frenchmen.

The captain, standing a little to one side, was listening to all the
curate said, and watching every movement of his brother, who, as soon
as he perceived the curate had made an end of his story, gave a deep
sigh and said with his eyes full of tears, “Oh, señor, if you only knew
what news you have given me and how it comes home to me, making me show
how I feel it with these tears that spring from my eyes in spite of all
my worldly wisdom and self-restraint! That brave captain that you speak
of is my eldest brother, who, being of a bolder and loftier mind than
my other brother or myself, chose the honourable and worthy calling of
arms, which was one of the three careers our father proposed to us, as
your comrade mentioned in that fable you thought he was telling you. I
followed that of letters, in which God and my own exertions have raised
me to the position in which you see me. My second brother is in Peru,
so wealthy that with what he has sent to my father and to me he has
fully repaid the portion he took with him, and has even furnished my
father’s hands with the means of gratifying his natural generosity,
while I too have been enabled to pursue my studies in a more becoming
and creditable fashion, and so to attain my present standing. My father
is still alive, though dying with anxie