t, for his testimony will not permit
me to depart from the truth in any particular. He was, I say, tied to
an oak, naked from the waist up, and a clown, whom I afterwards found
to be his master, was scarifying him by lashes with the reins of his
mare. As soon as I saw him I asked the reason of so cruel a
flagellation. The boor replied that he was flogging him because he was
his servant and because of carelessness that proceeded rather from
dishonesty than stupidity; on which this boy said, ‘Señor, he flogs me
only because I ask for my wages.’ The master made I know not what
speeches and explanations, which, though I listened to them, I did not
accept. In short, I compelled the clown to unbind him, and to swear he
would take him with him, and pay him real by real, and perfumed into
the bargain. Is not all this true, Andres my son? Didst thou not mark
with what authority I commanded him, and with what humility he promised
to do all I enjoined, specified, and required of him? Answer without
hesitation; tell these gentlemen what took place, that they may see
that it is as great an advantage as I say to have knights-errant
abroad.”

“All that your worship has said is quite true,” answered the lad; “but
the end of the business turned out just the opposite of what your
worship supposes.”

“How! the opposite?” said Don Quixote; “did not the clown pay thee
then?”

“Not only did he not pay me,” replied the lad, “but as soon as your
worship had passed out of the wood and we were alone, he tied me up
again to the same oak and gave me a fresh flogging, that left me like a
flayed Saint Bartholomew; and every stroke he gave me he followed up
with some jest or gibe about having made a fool of your worship, and
but for the pain I was suffering I should have laughed at the things he
said. In short he left me in such a condition that I have been until
now in a hospital getting cured of the injuries which that rascally
clown inflicted on me then; for all which your worship is to blame; for
if you had gone your own way and not come where there was no call for
you, nor meddled in other people’s affairs, my master would have been
content with giving me one or two dozen lashes, and would have then
loosed me and paid me what he owed me; but when your worship abused him
so out of measure, and gave him so many hard words, his anger was
kindled; and as he could not revenge himself on you, as soon as he saw
you had left him the storm burst upon me in such a way, that I feel as
if I should never be a man again.”

“The mischief,” said Don Quixote, “lay in my going away; for I should
not have gone until I had seen thee paid; because I ought to have known
well by long experience that there is no clown who will keep his word
if he finds it will not suit him to keep it; but thou rememberest,
Andres, that I swore if he did not pay thee I would go and seek him,
and find him though he were to hide himself in the whale’s belly.”

“That is true,” said Andres; “but it was of no use.”

“Thou shalt see now whether it is of use or not,” said Don Quixote; and
so saying, he got up hastily and bade Sancho bridle Rocinante, who was
browsing while they were eating. Dorothea asked him what he meant to
do. He replied that he meant to go in search of this clown and chastise
him for such iniquitous conduct, and see Andres paid to the last
maravedi, despite and in the teeth of all the clowns in the world. To
which she replied that he must remember that in accordance with his
promise he could not engage in any enterprise until he had concluded
hers; and that as he knew this better than anyone, he should restrain
his ardour until his return from her kingdom.

“That is true,” said Don Quixote, “and Andres must have patience until
my return as you say, señora; but I once more swear and promise not to
stop until I have seen him avenged and paid.”

“I have no faith in those oaths,” said Andres; “I would rather have now