nish off fulling
and knocking our senses out.”

“The devil take thee, man,” said Don Quixote; “what has a helmet to do
with fulling mills?”

“I don’t know,” replied Sancho, “but, faith, if I might speak as I
used, perhaps I could give such reasons that your worship would see you
were mistaken in what you say.”

“How can I be mistaken in what I say, unbelieving traitor?” returned
Don Quixote; “tell me, seest thou not yonder knight coming towards us
on a dappled grey steed, who has upon his head a helmet of gold?”

“What I see and make out,” answered Sancho, “is only a man on a grey
ass like my own, who has something that shines on his head.”

“Well, that is the helmet of Mambrino,” said Don Quixote; “stand to one
side and leave me alone with him; thou shalt see how, without saying a
word, to save time, I shall bring this adventure to an issue and
possess myself of the helmet I have so longed for.”

“I will take care to stand aside,” said Sancho; “but God grant, I say
once more, that it may be marjoram and not fulling mills.”

“I have told thee, brother, on no account to mention those fulling
mills to me again,” said Don Quixote, “or I vow—and I say no more—I’ll
full the soul out of you.”

Sancho held his peace in dread lest his master should carry out the vow
he had hurled like a bowl at him.

The fact of the matter as regards the helmet, steed, and knight that
Don Quixote saw, was this. In that neighbourhood there were two
villages, one of them so small that it had neither apothecary’s shop
nor barber, which the other that was close to it had, so the barber of
the larger served the smaller, and in it there was a sick man who
required to be bled and another man who wanted to be shaved, and on
this errand the barber was going, carrying with him a brass basin; but
as luck would have it, as he was on the way it began to rain, and not
to spoil his hat, which probably was a new one, he put the basin on his
head, and being clean it glittered at half a league’s distance. He rode
upon a grey ass, as Sancho said, and this was what made it seem to Don
Quixote to be a dapple-grey steed and a knight and a golden helmet; for
everything he saw he made to fall in with his crazy chivalry and
ill-errant notions; and when he saw the poor knight draw near, without
entering into any parley with him, at Rocinante’s top speed he bore
down upon him with the pike pointed low, fully determined to run him
through and through, and as he reached him, without checking the fury
of his charge, he cried to him:

“Defend thyself, miserable being, or yield me of thine own accord that
which is so reasonably my due.”

The barber, who without any expectation or apprehension of it saw this
apparition coming down upon him, had no other way of saving himself
from the stroke of the lance but to let himself fall off his ass; and
no sooner had he touched the ground than he sprang up more nimbly than
a deer and sped away across the plain faster than the wind.

He left the basin on the ground, with which Don Quixote contented
himself, saying that the pagan had shown his discretion and imitated
the beaver, which finding itself pressed by the hunters bites and cuts
off with its teeth that for which, by its natural instinct, it knows it
is pursued.

He told Sancho to pick up the helmet, and he taking it in his hands
said:

“By God the basin is a good one, and worth a real of eight if it is
worth a maravedis,” and handed it to his master, who immediately put it
on his head, turning it round, now this way, now that, in search of
fitment, and not finding it he said, “Clearly the pagan to whose
measure this famous head-piece was first forged must have had a very
large head; but the worst of it is half of it is wanting.”

When Sancho heard him call the basin a headpiece he was unable to
restrain his laughter, but remembering his master’s wrath he checked
himself in the midst of it.

“What art thou lau