
something to help me to get to Seville than all the revenges in the
world; if you have here anything to eat that I can take with me, give
it me, and God be with your worship and all knights-errant; and may
their errands turn out as well for themselves as they have for me.”

Sancho took out from his store a piece of bread and another of cheese,
and giving them to the lad he said, “Here, take this, brother Andres,
for we have all of us a share in your misfortune.”

“Why, what share have you got?”

“This share of bread and cheese I am giving you,” answered Sancho; “and
God knows whether I shall feel the want of it myself or not; for I
would have you know, friend, that we squires to knights-errant have to
bear a great deal of hunger and hard fortune, and even other things
more easily felt than told.”

Andres seized his bread and cheese, and seeing that nobody gave him
anything more, bent his head, and took hold of the road, as the saying
is. However, before leaving he said, “For the love of God, sir
knight-errant, if you ever meet me again, though you may see them
cutting me to pieces, give me no aid or succour, but leave me to my
misfortune, which will not be so great but that a greater will come to
me by being helped by your worship, on whom and all the knights-errant
that have ever been born God send his curse.”

Don Quixote was getting up to chastise him, but he took to his heels at
such a pace that no one attempted to follow him; and mightily
chapfallen was Don Quixote at Andres’ story, and the others had to take
great care to restrain their laughter so as not to put him entirely out
of countenance.



c31e.jpg (32K)



CHAPTER XXXII.
WHICH TREATS OF WHAT BEFELL DON QUIXOTE’S PARTY AT THE INN




c32a.jpg (132K)

Full Size




Their dainty repast being finished, they saddled at once, and without
any adventure worth mentioning they reached next day the inn, the
object of Sancho Panza’s fear and dread; but though he would have
rather not entered it, there was no help for it. The landlady, the
landlord, their daughter, and Maritornes, when they saw Don Quixote and
Sancho coming, went out to welcome them with signs of hearty
satisfaction, which Don Quixote received with dignity and gravity, and
bade them make up a better bed for him than the last time: to which the
landlady replied that if he paid better than he did the last time she
would give him one fit for a prince. Don Quixote said he would, so they
made up a tolerable one for him in the same garret as before; and he
lay down at once, being sorely shaken and in want of sleep.

No sooner was the door shut upon him than the landlady made at the
barber, and seizing him by the beard, said:

“By my faith you are not going to make a beard of my tail any longer;
you must give me back my tail, for it is a shame the way that thing of
my husband’s goes tossing about on the floor; I mean the comb that I
used to stick in my good tail.”

But for all she tugged at it the barber would not give it up until the
licentiate told him to let her have it, as there was now no further
occasion for that stratagem, because he might declare himself and
appear in his own character, and tell Don Quixote that he had fled to
this inn when those thieves the galley slaves robbed him; and should he
ask for the princess’s squire, they could tell him that she had sent
him on before her to give notice to the people of her kingdom that she
was coming, and bringing with her the deliverer of them all. On this
the barber cheerfully restored the tail to the landlady, and at the
same time they returned all the accessories they had borrowed to effect
Don Quixote’s deliverance. All the people of the inn were struck with
astonishment at the beauty of Dorothea, and even at the comely figure
of the shepherd Cardenio. The curate made them get ready such fare as
there was in the inn, and the landlord, in hope of better payment,
served th