eclaration before the alcalde of
this village that you never in all your life saw me until now, and that
neither am I the Don Quixote in print in the Second Part, nor this
Sancho Panza, my squire, the one your worship knew.”

“That I will do most willingly,” replied Don Álvaro; “though it amazes
me to find two Don Quixotes and two Sancho Panzas at once, as much
alike in name as they differ in demeanour; and again I say and declare
that what I saw I cannot have seen, and that what happened me cannot
have happened.”

“No doubt your worship is enchanted, like my lady Dulcinea del Toboso,”
said Sancho; “and would to heaven your disenchantment rested on my
giving myself another three thousand and odd lashes like what I’m
giving myself for her, for I’d lay them on without looking for
anything.”

“I don’t understand that about the lashes,” said Don Álvaro. Sancho
replied that it was a long story to tell, but he would tell him if they
happened to be going the same road.

By this dinner-time arrived, and Don Quixote and Don Álvaro dined
together. The alcalde of the village came by chance into the inn
together with a notary, and Don Quixote laid a petition before him,
showing that it was requisite for his rights that Don Álvaro Tarfe, the
gentleman there present, should make a declaration before him that he
did not know Don Quixote of La Mancha, also there present, and that he
was not the one that was in print in a history entitled “Second Part of
Don Quixote of La Mancha, by one Avellaneda of Tordesillas.” The
alcalde finally put it in legal form, and the declaration was made with
all the formalities required in such cases, at which Don Quixote and
Sancho were in high delight, as if a declaration of the sort was of any
great importance to them, and as if their words and deeds did not
plainly show the difference between the two Don Quixotes and the two
Sanchos. Many civilities and offers of service were exchanged by Don
Álvaro and Don Quixote, in the course of which the great Manchegan
displayed such good taste that he disabused Don Álvaro of the error he
was under; and he, on his part, felt convinced he must have been
enchanted, now that he had been brought in contact with two such
opposite Don Quixotes.

Evening came, they set out from the village, and after about half a
league two roads branched off, one leading to Don Quixote’s village,
the other the road Don Álvaro was to follow. In this short interval Don
Quixote told him of his unfortunate defeat, and of Dulcinea’s
enchantment and the remedy, all which threw Don Álvaro into fresh
amazement, and embracing Don Quixote and Sancho, he went his way, and
Don Quixote went his. That night he passed among trees again in order
to give Sancho an opportunity of working out his penance, which he did
in the same fashion as the night before, at the expense of the bark of
the beech trees much more than of his back, of which he took such good
care that the lashes would not have knocked off a fly had there been
one there. The duped Don Quixote did not miss a single stroke of the
count, and he found that together with those of the night before they
made up three thousand and twenty-nine. The sun apparently had got up
early to witness the sacrifice, and with his light they resumed their
journey, discussing the deception practised on Don Álvaro, and saying
how well done it was to have taken his declaration before a magistrate
in such an unimpeachable form. That day and night they travelled on,
nor did anything worth mention happen to them, unless it was that in
the course of the night Sancho finished off his task, whereat Don
Quixote was beyond measure joyful. He watched for daylight, to see if
along the road he should fall in with his already disenchanted lady
Dulcinea; and as he pursued his journey there was no woman he met that
he did not go up to, to see if she was Dulcinea del Toboso, as he held
it absolutely certain that Merlin’s 