e government half a day, and you want me to have six hundred ducats
already!”

The carver made signs to the farmer to leave the room, which he did
with his head down, and to all appearance in terror lest the governor
should carry his threats into effect, for the rogue knew very well how
to play his part.

But let us leave Sancho in his wrath, and peace be with them all; and
let us return to Don Quixote, whom we left with his face bandaged and
doctored after the cat wounds, of which he was not cured for eight
days; and on one of these there befell him what Cide Hamete promises to
relate with that exactitude and truth with which he is wont to set
forth everything connected with this great history, however minute it
may be.



p47e.jpg (12K)



CHAPTER XLVIII.
OF WHAT BEFELL DON QUIXOTE WITH DOÑA RODRIGUEZ, THE DUCHESS’S DUENNA,
TOGETHER WITH OTHER OCCURRENCES WORTHY OF RECORD AND ETERNAL
REMEMBRANCE




p48a.jpg (131K)

Full Size



Exceedingly moody and dejected was the sorely wounded Don Quixote, with
his face bandaged and marked, not by the hand of God, but by the claws
of a cat, mishaps incidental to knight-errantry.



p48b.jpg (316K)

Full Size



Six days he remained without appearing in public, and one night as he
lay awake thinking of his misfortunes and of Altisidora’s pursuit of
him, he perceived that someone was opening the door of his room with a
key, and he at once made up his mind that the enamoured damsel was
coming to make an assault upon his chastity and put him in danger of
failing in the fidelity he owed to his lady Dulcinea del Toboso. “No,”
said he, firmly persuaded of the truth of his idea (and he said it loud
enough to be heard), “the greatest beauty upon earth shall not avail to
make me renounce my adoration of her whom I bear stamped and graved in
the core of my heart and the secret depths of my bowels; be thou, lady
mine, transformed into a clumsy country wench, or into a nymph of
golden Tagus weaving a web of silk and gold, let Merlin or Montesinos
hold thee captive where they will; where’er thou art, thou art mine,
and where’er I am, must be thine.” The very instant he had uttered
these words, the door opened. He stood up on the bed wrapped from head
to foot in a yellow satin coverlet, with a cap on his head, and his
face and his moustaches tied up, his face because of the scratches, and
his moustaches to keep them from drooping and falling down, in which
trim he looked the most extraordinary scarecrow that could be
conceived. He kept his eyes fixed on the door, and just as he was
expecting to see the love-smitten and unhappy Altisidora make her
appearance, he saw coming in a most venerable duenna, in a long
white-bordered veil that covered and enveloped her from head to foot.
Between the fingers of her left hand she held a short lighted candle,
while with her right she shaded it to keep the light from her eyes,
which were covered by spectacles of great size, and she advanced with
noiseless steps, treading very softly.

Don Quixote kept an eye upon her from his watchtower, and observing her
costume and noting her silence, he concluded that it must be some witch
or sorceress that was coming in such a guise to work him some mischief,
and he began crossing himself at a great rate. The spectre still
advanced, and on reaching the middle of the room, looked up and saw the
energy with which Don Quixote was crossing himself; and if he was
scared by seeing such a figure as hers, she was terrified at the sight
of his; for the moment she saw his tall yellow form with the coverlet
and the bandages that disfigured him, she gave a loud scream, and
exclaiming, “Jesus! what’s this I see?” let fall the candle in her
fright, and then finding herself in the dark, turned about to make off,
but stumbling on her skirts in her consternation, she measured her
length with a mighty fall.



p48c.jpg (249K)

Full Size



Don Quixo