alicia, and Portugal, and produced a goodly line of men distinguished
in the service of Church and State. Gonzalo himself, and apparently a
son of his, followed Ferdinand III in the great campaign of 1236-48
that gave Cordova and Seville to Christian Spain and penned up the
Moors in the kingdom of Granada, and his descendants intermarried with
some of the noblest families of the Peninsula and numbered among them
soldiers, magistrates, and Church dignitaries, including at least two
cardinal-archbishops.

Of the line that settled in Andalusia, Deigo de Cervantes, Commander of
the Order of Santiago, married Juana Avellaneda, daughter of Juan Arias
de Saavedra, and had several sons, of whom one was Gonzalo Gomez,
Corregidor of Jerez and ancestor of the Mexican and Columbian branches
of the family; and another, Juan, whose son Rodrigo married Doña Leonor
de Cortinas, and by her had four children, Rodrigo, Andrea, Luisa, and
Miguel, our author.

The pedigree of Cervantes is not without its bearing on “Don Quixote.”
A man who could look back upon an ancestry of genuine knights-errant
extending from well-nigh the time of Pelayo to the siege of Granada was
likely to have a strong feeling on the subject of the sham chivalry of
the romances. It gives a point, too, to what he says in more than one
place about families that have once been great and have tapered away
until they have come to nothing, like a pyramid. It was the case of his
own.

He was born at Alcalá de Henares and baptised in the church of Santa
Maria Mayor on the 9th of October, 1547. Of his boyhood and youth we
know nothing, unless it be from the glimpse he gives us in the preface
to his “Comedies” of himself as a boy looking on with delight while
Lope de Rueda and his company set up their rude plank stage in the
plaza and acted the rustic farces which he himself afterwards took as
the model of his interludes. This first glimpse, however, is a
significant one, for it shows the early development of that love of the
drama which exercised such an influence on his life and seems to have
grown stronger as he grew older, and of which this very preface,
written only a few months before his death, is such a striking proof.
He gives us to understand, too, that he was a great reader in his
youth; but of this no assurance was needed, for the First Part of “Don
Quixote” alone proves a vast amount of miscellaneous reading, romances
of chivalry, ballads, popular poetry, chronicles, for which he had no
time or opportunity except in the first twenty years of his life; and
his misquotations and mistakes in matters of detail are always, it may
be noticed, those of a man recalling the reading of his boyhood.

Other things besides the drama were in their infancy when Cervantes was
a boy. The period of his boyhood was in every way a transition period
for Spain. The old chivalrous Spain had passed away. The new Spain was
the mightiest power the world had seen since the Roman Empire and it
had not yet been called upon to pay the price of its greatness. By the
policy of Ferdinand and Ximenez the sovereign had been made absolute,
and the Church and Inquisition adroitly adjusted to keep him so. The
nobles, who had always resisted absolutism as strenuously as they had
fought the Moors, had been divested of all political power, a like fate
had befallen the cities, the free constitutions of Castile and Aragon
had been swept away, and the only function that remained to the Cortés
was that of granting money at the King’s dictation.

The transition extended to literature. Men who, like Garcilaso de la
Vega and Diego Hurtado de Mendoza, followed the Italian wars, had
brought back from Italy the products of the post-Renaissance
literature, which took root and flourished and even threatened to
extinguish the native growths. Damon and Thyrsis, Phyllis and Chloe had
been fairly naturalised in Spain, together with all the devices of
pastoral poetr