already salted the giant; there’s no
doubt about the bulls; my county is all right!”

Who could have helped laughing at the absurdities of the pair, master
and man? And laugh they did, all except the landlord, who cursed
himself; but at length the barber, Cardenio, and the curate contrived
with no small trouble to get Don Quixote on the bed, and he fell asleep
with every appearance of excessive weariness. They left him to sleep,
and came out to the gate of the inn to console Sancho Panza on not
having found the head of the giant; but much more work had they to
appease the landlord, who was furious at the sudden death of his
wine-skins; and said the landlady half scolding, half crying, “At an
evil moment and in an unlucky hour he came into my house, this
knight-errant—would that I had never set eyes on him, for dear he has
cost me; the last time he went off with the overnight score against him
for supper, bed, straw, and barley, for himself and his squire and a
hack and an ass, saying he was a knight adventurer—God send unlucky
adventures to him and all the adventurers in the world—and therefore
not bound to pay anything, for it was so settled by the knight-errantry
tariff: and then, all because of him, came the other gentleman and
carried off my tail, and gives it back more than two cuartillos the
worse, all stripped of its hair, so that it is no use for my husband’s
purpose; and then, for a finishing touch to all, to burst my wine-skins
and spill my wine! I wish I saw his own blood spilt! But let him not
deceive himself, for, by the bones of my father and the shade of my
mother, they shall pay me down every quarto; or my name is not what it
is, and I am not my father’s daughter.” All this and more to the same
effect the landlady delivered with great irritation, and her good maid
Maritornes backed her up, while the daughter held her peace and smiled
from time to time. The curate smoothed matters by promising to make
good all losses to the best of his power, not only as regarded the
wine-skins but also the wine, and above all the depreciation of the
tail which they set such store by. Dorothea comforted Sancho, telling
him that she pledged herself, as soon as it should appear certain that
his master had decapitated the giant, and she found herself peacefully
established in her kingdom, to bestow upon him the best county there
was in it. With this Sancho consoled himself, and assured the princess
she might rely upon it that he had seen the head of the giant, and more
by token it had a beard that reached to the girdle, and that if it was
not to be seen now it was because everything that happened in that
house went by enchantment, as he himself had proved the last time he
had lodged there. Dorothea said she fully believed it, and that he need
not be uneasy, for all would go well and turn out as he wished. All
therefore being appeased, the curate was anxious to go on with the
novel, as he saw there was but little more left to read. Dorothea and
the others begged him to finish it, and he, as he was willing to please
them, and enjoyed reading it himself, continued the tale in these
words:

The result was, that from the confidence Anselmo felt in Camilla’s
virtue, he lived happy and free from anxiety, and Camilla purposely
looked coldly on Lothario, that Anselmo might suppose her feelings
towards him to be the opposite of what they were; and the better to
support the position, Lothario begged to be excused from coming to the
house, as the displeasure with which Camilla regarded his presence was
plain to be seen. But the befooled Anselmo said he would on no account
allow such a thing, and so in a thousand ways he became the author of
his own dishonour, while he believed he was insuring his happiness.
Meanwhile the satisfaction with which Leonela saw herself empowered to
carry on her amour reached such a height that, regardless of everything
else, she followed her inclinations u