r fields of my cheeks.
Let it move thee, crafty, ill-conditioned monster, to see my blooming
youth—still in its teens, for I am not yet twenty—wasting and withering
away beneath the husk of a rude peasant wench; and if I do not appear
in that shape now, it is a special favour Señor Merlin here has granted
me, to the sole end that my beauty may soften thee; for the tears of
beauty in distress turn rocks into cotton and tigers into ewes. Lay on
to that hide of thine, thou great untamed brute, rouse up thy lusty
vigour that only urges thee to eat and eat, and set free the softness
of my flesh, the gentleness of my nature, and the fairness of my face.
And if thou wilt not relent or come to reason for me, do so for the
sake of that poor knight thou hast beside thee; thy master I mean,
whose soul I can this moment see, how he has it stuck in his throat not
ten fingers from his lips, and only waiting for thy inflexible or
yielding reply to make its escape by his mouth or go back again into
his stomach.”

Don Quixote on hearing this felt his throat, and turning to the duke he
said, “By God, señor, Dulcinea says true, I have my soul stuck here in
my throat like the nut of a crossbow.”

“What say you to this, Sancho?” said the duchess.

“I say, señora,” returned Sancho, “what I said before; as for the
lashes, abernuncio!”

“Abrenuncio, you should say, Sancho, and not as you do,” said the duke.

“Let me alone, your highness,” said Sancho. “I’m not in a humour now to
look into niceties or a letter more or less, for these lashes that are
to be given me, or I’m to give myself, have so upset me, that I don’t
know what I’m saying or doing. But I’d like to know of this lady, my
lady Dulcinea del Toboso, where she learned this way she has of asking
favours. She comes to ask me to score my flesh with lashes, and she
calls me soul of a pitcher, and great untamed brute, and a string of
foul names that the devil is welcome to. Is my flesh brass? or is it
anything to me whether she is enchanted or not? Does she bring with her
a basket of fair linen, shirts, kerchiefs, socks—not that I wear any—to
coax me? No, nothing but one piece of abuse after another, though she
knows the proverb they have here that ‘an ass loaded with gold goes
lightly up a mountain,’ and that ‘gifts break rocks,’ and ‘praying to
God and plying the hammer,’ and that ‘one “take” is better than two
“I’ll give thee’s.”’ Then there’s my master, who ought to stroke me
down and pet me to make me turn wool and carded cotton; he says if he
gets hold of me he’ll tie me naked to a tree and double the tale of
lashes on me. These tender-hearted gentry should consider that it’s not
merely a squire, but a governor they are asking to whip himself; just
as if it was ‘drink with cherries.’ Let them learn, plague take them,
the right way to ask, and beg, and behave themselves; for all times are
not alike, nor are people always in good humour. I’m now ready to burst
with grief at seeing my green coat torn, and they come to ask me to
whip myself of my own free will, I having as little fancy for it as for
turning cacique.”

“Well then, the fact is, friend Sancho,” said the duke, “that unless
you become softer than a ripe fig, you shall not get hold of the
government. It would be a nice thing for me to send my islanders a
cruel governor with flinty bowels, who won’t yield to the tears of
afflicted damsels or to the prayers of wise, magisterial, ancient
enchanters and sages. In short, Sancho, either you must be whipped by
yourself, or they must whip you, or you shan’t be governor.”

“Señor,” said Sancho, “won’t two days’ grace be given me in which to
consider what is best for me?”

“No, certainly not,” said Merlin; “here, this minute, and on the spot,
the matter must be settled; either Dulcinea will return to the cave of
Montesinos and to her former condition of peasant wench, or else in her
present form shall be carried to the Elysia