kest thou now, friend Sancho?” said Don Quixote at this.
“Hearest thou that? Did I not tell thee so? See how we have already got
a kingdom to govern and a queen to marry!”

“On my oath it is so,” said Sancho; “and foul fortune to him who won’t
marry after slitting Señor Pandahilado’s windpipe! And then, how
illfavoured the queen is! I wish the fleas in my bed were that sort!”

And so saying he cut a couple of capers in the air with every sign of
extreme satisfaction, and then ran to seize the bridle of Dorothea’s
mule, and checking it fell on his knees before her, begging her to give
him her hand to kiss in token of his acknowledgment of her as his queen
and mistress. Which of the bystanders could have helped laughing to see
the madness of the master and the simplicity of the servant? Dorothea
therefore gave her hand, and promised to make him a great lord in her
kingdom, when Heaven should be so good as to permit her to recover and
enjoy it, for which Sancho returned thanks in words that set them all
laughing again.

“This, sirs,” continued Dorothea, “is my story; it only remains to tell
you that of all the attendants I took with me from my kingdom I have
none left except this well-bearded squire, for all were drowned in a
great tempest we encountered when in sight of port; and he and I came
to land on a couple of planks as if by a miracle; and indeed the whole
course of my life is a miracle and a mystery as you may have observed;
and if I have been over minute in any respect or not as precise as I
ought, let it be accounted for by what the licentiate said at the
beginning of my tale, that constant and excessive troubles deprive the
sufferers of their memory.”

“They shall not deprive me of mine, exalted and worthy princess,” said
Don Quixote, “however great and unexampled those which I shall endure
in your service may be; and here I confirm anew the boon I have
promised you, and I swear to go with you to the end of the world until
I find myself in the presence of your fierce enemy, whose haughty head
I trust by the aid of my arm to cut off with the edge of this—I will
not say good sword, thanks to Gines de Pasamonte who carried away
mine”—(this he said between his teeth, and then continued), “and when
it has been cut off and you have been put in peaceful possession of
your realm it shall be left to your own decision to dispose of your
person as may be most pleasing to you; for so long as my memory is
occupied, my will enslaved, and my understanding enthralled by her—I
say no more—it is impossible for me for a moment to contemplate
marriage, even with a Phœnix.”

The last words of his master about not wanting to marry were so
disagreeable to Sancho that raising his voice he exclaimed with great
irritation:

“By my oath, Señor Don Quixote, you are not in your right senses; for
how can your worship possibly object to marrying such an exalted
princess as this? Do you think Fortune will offer you behind every
stone such a piece of luck as is offered you now? Is my lady Dulcinea
fairer, perchance? Not she; nor half as fair; and I will even go so far
as to say she does not come up to the shoe of this one here. A poor
chance I have of getting that county I am waiting for if your worship
goes looking for dainties in the bottom of the sea. In the devil’s
name, marry, marry, and take this kingdom that comes to hand without
any trouble, and when you are king make me a marquis or governor of a
province, and for the rest let the devil take it all.”

Don Quixote, when he heard such blasphemies uttered against his lady
Dulcinea, could not endure it, and lifting his pike, without saying
anything to Sancho or uttering a word, he gave him two such thwacks
that he brought him to the ground; and had it not been that Dorothea
cried out to him to spare him he would have no doubt taken his life on
the spot.

“Do you think,” he said to him after a pause, “you scurvy clown, that
you 