e enough for him to be in the stable,” said Sancho, “for
neither he nor I are worthy to rest a moment in the apple of your
highness’s eye, and I’d as soon stab myself as consent to it; for
though my master says that in civilities it is better to lose by a card
too many than a card too few, when it comes to civilities to asses we
must mind what we are about and keep within due bounds.”

“Take him to your government, Sancho,” said the duchess, “and there you
will be able to make as much of him as you like, and even release him
from work and pension him off.”

“Don’t think, señora duchess, that you have said anything absurd,” said
Sancho; “I have seen more than two asses go to governments, and for me
to take mine with me would be nothing new.”

Sancho’s words made the duchess laugh again and gave her fresh
amusement, and dismissing him to sleep she went away to tell the duke
the conversation she had had with him, and between them they plotted
and arranged to play a joke upon Don Quixote that was to be a rare one
and entirely in knight-errantry style, and in that same style they
practised several upon him, so much in keeping and so clever that they
form the best adventures this great history contains.



p33e.jpg (34K)



CHAPTER XXXIV.
WHICH RELATES HOW THEY LEARNED THE WAY IN WHICH THEY WERE TO DISENCHANT
THE PEERLESS DULCINEA DEL TOBOSO, WHICH IS ONE OF THE RAREST ADVENTURES
IN THIS BOOK




p34a.jpg (141K)

Full Size



Great was the pleasure the duke and duchess took in the conversation of
Don Quixote and Sancho Panza; and, more bent than ever upon the plan
they had of practising some jokes upon them that should have the look
and appearance of adventures, they took as their basis of action what
Don Quixote had already told them about the cave of Montesinos, in
order to play him a famous one. But what the duchess marvelled at above
all was that Sancho’s simplicity could be so great as to make him
believe as absolute truth that Dulcinea had been enchanted, when it was
he himself who had been the enchanter and trickster in the business.
Having, therefore, instructed their servants in everything they were to
do, six days afterwards they took him out to hunt, with as great a
retinue of huntsmen and beaters as a crowned king.

They presented Don Quixote with a hunting suit, and Sancho with another
of the finest green cloth; but Don Quixote declined to put his on,
saying that he must soon return to the hard pursuit of arms, and could
not carry wardrobes or stores with him. Sancho, however, took what they
gave him, meaning to sell it at the first opportunity.

The appointed day having arrived, Don Quixote armed himself, and Sancho
arrayed himself, and mounted on his Dapple (for he would not give him
up though they offered him a horse), he placed himself in the midst of
the troop of huntsmen. The duchess came out splendidly attired, and Don
Quixote, in pure courtesy and politeness, held the rein of her palfrey,
though the duke wanted not to allow him; and at last they reached a
wood that lay between two high mountains, where, after occupying
various posts, ambushes, and paths, and distributing the party in
different positions, the hunt began with great noise, shouting, and
hallooing, so that, between the baying of the hounds and the blowing of
the horns, they could not hear one another. The duchess dismounted, and
with a sharp boar-spear in her hand posted herself where she knew the
wild boars were in the habit of passing. The duke and Don Quixote
likewise dismounted and placed themselves one at each side of her.
Sancho took up a position in the rear of all without dismounting from
Dapple, whom he dared not desert lest some mischief should befall him.
Scarcely had they taken their stand in a line with several of their
servants, when they saw a huge boar, closely pressed by the hounds and
followed by the huntsmen, making towards them, grinding his teeth and