of going to
tamper with their princesses and trouble their ladies, were to come and
cudgel your ribs, and not leave a whole bone in you? They would,
indeed, have very good reason, if they did not see that I am under
orders, and that ‘you are a messenger, my friend, no blame belongs to
you.’ Don’t you trust to that, Sancho, for the Manchegan folk are as
hot-tempered as they are honest, and won’t put up with liberties from
anybody. By the Lord, if they get scent of you, it will be worse for
you, I promise you. Be off, you scoundrel! Let the bolt fall. Why
should I go looking for three feet on a cat, to please another man; and
what is more, when looking for Dulcinea will be looking for Marica in
Ravena, or the bachelor in Salamanca? The devil, the devil and nobody
else, has mixed me up in this business!”

Such was the soliloquy Sancho held with himself, and all the conclusion
he could come to was to say to himself again, “Well, there’s remedy for
everything except death, under whose yoke we have all to pass, whether
we like it or not, when life’s finished. I have seen by a thousand
signs that this master of mine is a madman fit to be tied, and for that
matter, I too, am not behind him; for I’m a greater fool than he is
when I follow him and serve him, if there’s any truth in the proverb
that says, ‘Tell me what company thou keepest, and I’ll tell thee what
thou art,’ or in that other, ‘Not with whom thou art bred, but with
whom thou art fed.’ Well then, if he be mad, as he is, and with a
madness that mostly takes one thing for another, and white for black,
and black for white, as was seen when he said the windmills were
giants, and the monks’ mules dromedaries, flocks of sheep armies of
enemies, and much more to the same tune, it will not be very hard to
make him believe that some country girl, the first I come across here,
is the lady Dulcinea; and if he does not believe it, I’ll swear it; and
if he should swear, I’ll swear again; and if he persists I’ll persist
still more, so as, come what may, to have my quoit always over the peg.
Maybe, by holding out in this way, I may put a stop to his sending me
on messages of this kind another time; or maybe he will think, as I
suspect he will, that one of those wicked enchanters, who he says have
a spite against him, has changed her form for the sake of doing him an
ill turn and injuring him.”

With this reflection Sancho made his mind easy, counting the business
as good as settled, and stayed there till the afternoon so as to make
Don Quixote think he had time enough to go to El Toboso and return; and
things turned out so luckily for him that as he got up to mount Dapple,
he spied, coming from El Toboso towards the spot where he stood, three
peasant girls on three colts, or fillies—for the author does not make
the point clear, though it is more likely they were she-asses, the
usual mount with village girls; but as it is of no great consequence,
we need not stop to prove it.

To be brief, the instant Sancho saw the peasant girls, he returned full
speed to seek his master, and found him sighing and uttering a thousand
passionate lamentations. When Don Quixote saw him he exclaimed, “What
news, Sancho, my friend? Am I to mark this day with a white stone or a
black?”

“Your worship,” replied Sancho, “had better mark it with ruddle, like
the inscriptions on the walls of class rooms, that those who see it may
see it plain.”

“Then thou bringest good news,” said Don Quixote.

“So good,” replied Sancho, “that your worship has only to spur
Rocinante and get out into the open field to see the lady Dulcinea del
Toboso, who, with two others, damsels of hers, is coming to see your
worship.”

“Holy God! what art thou saying, Sancho, my friend?” exclaimed Don
Quixote. “Take care thou art not deceiving me, or seeking by false joy
to cheer my real sadness.”

“What could I get by deceiving your worship,” returned Sancho,
“especially whe