ne: of thine, that thou hast so little respect for
me; of mine, that I do not make myself more respected. There was
Gandalin, the squire of Amadis of Gaul, that was Count of the Insula
Firme, and we read of him that he always addressed his lord with his
cap in his hand, his head bowed down and his body bent double, more
turquesco. And then, what shall we say of Gasabal, the squire of
Galaor, who was so silent that in order to indicate to us the greatness
of his marvellous taciturnity his name is only once mentioned in the
whole of that history, as long as it is truthful? From all I have said
thou wilt gather, Sancho, that there must be a difference between
master and man, between lord and lackey, between knight and squire: so
that from this day forward in our intercourse we must observe more
respect and take less liberties, for in whatever way I may be provoked
with you it will be bad for the pitcher. The favours and benefits that
I have promised you will come in due time, and if they do not your
wages at least will not be lost, as I have already told you.”

“All that your worship says is very well,” said Sancho, “but I should
like to know (in case the time of favours should not come, and it might
be necessary to fall back upon wages) how much did the squire of a
knight-errant get in those days, and did they agree by the month, or by
the day like bricklayers?”

“I do not believe,” replied Don Quixote, “that such squires were ever
on wages, but were dependent on favour; and if I have now mentioned
thine in the sealed will I have left at home, it was with a view to
what may happen; for as yet I know not how chivalry will turn out in
these wretched times of ours, and I do not wish my soul to suffer for
trifles in the other world; for I would have thee know, Sancho, that in
this there is no condition more hazardous than that of adventurers.”

“That is true,” said Sancho, “since the mere noise of the hammers of a
fulling mill can disturb and disquiet the heart of such a valiant
errant adventurer as your worship; but you may be sure I will not open
my lips henceforward to make light of anything of your worship’s, but
only to honour you as my master and natural lord.”

“By so doing,” replied Don Quixote, “shalt thou live long on the face
of the earth; for next to parents, masters are to be respected as
though they were parents.”



c19e.jpg (33K)



CHAPTER XXI.
WHICH TREATS OF THE EXALTED ADVENTURE AND RICH PRIZE OF MAMBRINO’S
HELMET, TOGETHER WITH OTHER THINGS THAT HAPPENED TO OUR INVINCIBLE
KNIGHT




c20a.jpg (73K)

Full Size




It now began to rain a little, and Sancho was for going into the
fulling mills, but Don Quixote had taken such an abhorrence to them on
account of the late joke that he would not enter them on any account;
so turning aside to right they came upon another road, different from
that which they had taken the night before. Shortly afterwards Don
Quixote perceived a man on horseback who wore on his head something
that shone like gold, and the moment he saw him he turned to Sancho and
said:

“I think, Sancho, there is no proverb that is not true, all being
maxims drawn from experience itself, the mother of all the sciences,
especially that one that says, ‘Where one door shuts, another opens.’ I
say so because if last night fortune shut the door of the adventure we
were looking for against us, cheating us with the fulling mills, it now
opens wide another one for another better and more certain adventure,
and if I do not contrive to enter it, it will be my own fault, and I
cannot lay it to my ignorance of fulling mills, or the darkness of the
night. I say this because, if I mistake not, there comes towards us one
who wears on his head the helmet of Mambrino, concerning which I took
the oath thou rememberest.”

“Mind what you say, your worship, and still more what you do,” said
Sancho, “for I don’t want any more fulling mills to fi