wn is
singing?”

“I do,” said Sancho, “but what has Roncesvalles chase to do with what
we have in hand? He might just as well be singing the ballad of
Calainos, for any good or ill that can come to us in our business.”

By this time the labourer had come up, and Don Quixote asked him, “Can
you tell me, worthy friend, and God speed you, whereabouts here is the
palace of the peerless princess Doña Dulcinea del Toboso?”

“Señor,” replied the lad, “I am a stranger, and I have been only a few
days in the town, doing farm work for a rich farmer. In that house
opposite there live the curate of the village and the sacristan, and
both or either of them will be able to give your worship some account
of this lady princess, for they have a list of all the people of El
Toboso; though it is my belief there is not a princess living in the
whole of it; many ladies there are, of quality, and in her own house
each of them may be a princess.”

“Well, then, she I am inquiring for will be one of these, my friend,”
said Don Quixote.

“May be so,” replied the lad; “God be with you, for here comes the
daylight;” and without waiting for any more of his questions, he
whipped on his mules.

Sancho, seeing his master downcast and somewhat dissatisfied, said to
him, “Señor, daylight will be here before long, and it will not do for
us to let the sun find us in the street; it will be better for us to
quit the city, and for your worship to hide in some forest in the
neighbourhood, and I will come back in the daytime, and I won’t leave a
nook or corner of the whole village that I won’t search for the house,
castle, or palace, of my lady, and it will be hard luck for me if I
don’t find it; and as soon as I have found it I will speak to her
grace, and tell her where and how your worship is waiting for her to
arrange some plan for you to see her without any damage to her honour
and reputation.”

“Sancho,” said Don Quixote, “thou hast delivered a thousand sentences
condensed in the compass of a few words; I thank thee for the advice
thou hast given me, and take it most gladly. Come, my son, let us go
look for some place where I may hide, while thou dost return, as thou
sayest, to seek, and speak with my lady, from whose discretion and
courtesy I look for favours more than miraculous.”

Sancho was in a fever to get his master out of the town, lest he should
discover the falsehood of the reply he had brought to him in the Sierra
Morena on behalf of Dulcinea; so he hastened their departure, which
they took at once, and two miles out of the village they found a forest
or thicket wherein Don Quixote ensconced himself, while Sancho returned
to the city to speak to Dulcinea, in which embassy things befell him
which demand fresh attention and a new chapter.



p09e.jpg (34K)



CHAPTER X.
WHEREIN IS RELATED THE CRAFTY DEVICE SANCHO ADOPTED TO ENCHANT THE LADY
DULCINEA, AND OTHER INCIDENTS AS LUDICROUS AS THEY ARE TRUE




p10a.jpg (142K)

Full Size



When the author of this great history comes to relate what is set down
in this chapter he says he would have preferred to pass it over in
silence, fearing it would not be believed, because here Don Quixote’s
madness reaches the confines of the greatest that can be conceived, and
even goes a couple of bowshots beyond the greatest. But after all,
though still under the same fear and apprehension, he has recorded it
without adding to the story or leaving out a particle of the truth, and
entirely disregarding the charges of falsehood that might be brought
against him; and he was right, for the truth may run fine but will not
break, and always rises above falsehood as oil above water; and so,
going on with his story, he says that as soon as Don Quixote had
ensconced himself in the forest, oak grove, or wood near El Toboso, he
bade Sancho return to the city, and not come into his presence again
without having first spoken on his behalf to his la