ar a special gift for what they call
poetry. I say so because his fate brought him to my galley and to my
bench, and made him a slave to the same master; and before we left the
port this gentleman composed two sonnets by way of epitaphs, one on the
Goletta and the other on the fort; indeed, I may as well repeat them,
for I have them by heart, and I think they will be liked rather than
disliked.

The instant the captive mentioned the name of Don Pedro de Aguilar, Don
Fernando looked at his companions and they all three smiled; and when
he came to speak of the sonnets one of them said, “Before your worship
proceeds any further I entreat you to tell me what became of that Don
Pedro de Aguilar you have spoken of.”

“All I know is,” replied the captive, “that after having been in
Constantinople two years, he escaped in the disguise of an Arnaut, in
company with a Greek spy; but whether he regained his liberty or not I
cannot tell, though I fancy he did, because a year afterwards I saw the
Greek at Constantinople, though I was unable to ask him what the result
of the journey was.”

“Well then, you are right,” returned the gentleman, “for that Don Pedro
is my brother, and he is now in our village in good health, rich,
married, and with three children.”

“Thanks be to God for all the mercies he has shown him,” said the
captive; “for to my mind there is no happiness on earth to compare with
recovering lost liberty.”

“And what is more,” said the gentleman, “I know the sonnets my brother
made.”

“Then let your worship repeat them,” said the captive, “for you will
recite them better than I can.”

“With all my heart,” said the gentleman; “that on the Goletta runs
thus.”



c39e.jpg (38K)



CHAPTER XL.
IN WHICH THE STORY OF THE CAPTIVE IS CONTINUED.




c40a.jpg (131K)

Full Size




SONNET

“Blest souls, that, from this mortal husk set free,
In guerdon of brave deeds beatified,
Above this lowly orb of ours abide
Made heirs of heaven and immortality,
With noble rage and ardour glowing ye
Your strength, while strength was yours, in battle plied,
And with your own blood and the foeman’s dyed
The sandy soil and the encircling sea.
It was the ebbing life-blood first that failed
The weary arms; the stout hearts never quailed.
Though vanquished, yet ye earned the victor’s crown:
Though mourned, yet still triumphant was your fall
For there ye won, between the sword and wall,
In Heaven glory and on earth renown.”


“That is it exactly, according to my recollection,” said the captive.

“Well then, that on the fort,” said the gentleman, “if my memory serves
me, goes thus:

SONNET

“Up from this wasted soil, this shattered shell,
Whose walls and towers here in ruin lie,
Three thousand soldier souls took wing on high,
In the bright mansions of the blest to dwell.
The onslaught of the foeman to repel
By might of arm all vainly did they try,
And when at length ’twas left them but to die,
Wearied and few the last defenders fell.
And this same arid soil hath ever been
A haunt of countless mournful memories,
As well in our day as in days of yore.
But never yet to Heaven it sent, I ween,
From its hard bosom purer souls than these,
Or braver bodies on its surface bore.”


The sonnets were not disliked, and the captive was rejoiced at the
tidings they gave him of his comrade, and continuing his tale, he went
on to say:

The Goletta and the fort being thus in their hands, the Turks gave
orders to dismantle the Goletta—for the fort was reduced to such a
state that there was nothing left to level—and to do the work more
quickly and easily they mined it in three places; but nowhere were they
able to blow up the part which seemed to be the least strong, that is
to say, the old walls, while all that remained standing of the new
fortifications that the Fratin had made came to the ground with the
greatest ease. Finally the fleet returned victorious and triump