ck, he was so sore that it nearly drove him out of his senses.

“The cause of that soreness,” said Don Quixote, “will be, no doubt,
that the staff wherewith they smote thee being a very long one, it
caught thee all down the back, where all the parts that are sore are
situated, and had it reached any further thou wouldst be sorer still.”

“By God,” said Sancho, “your worship has relieved me of a great doubt,
and cleared up the point for me in elegant style! Body o’ me! is the
cause of my soreness such a mystery that there’s any need to tell me I
am sore everywhere the staff hit me? If it was my ankles that pained me
there might be something in going divining why they did, but it is not
much to divine that I’m sore where they thrashed me. By my faith,
master mine, the ills of others hang by a hair; every day I am
discovering more and more how little I have to hope for from keeping
company with your worship; for if this time you have allowed me to be
drubbed, the next time, or a hundred times more, we’ll have the
blanketings of the other day over again, and all the other pranks
which, if they have fallen on my shoulders now, will be thrown in my
teeth by-and-by. I would do a great deal better (if I was not an
ignorant brute that will never do any good all my life), I would do a
great deal better, I say, to go home to my wife and children and
support them and bring them up on what God may please to give me,
instead of following your worship along roads that lead nowhere and
paths that are none at all, with little to drink and less to eat. And
then when it comes to sleeping! Measure out seven feet on the earth,
brother squire, and if that’s not enough for you, take as many more,
for you may have it all your own way and stretch yourself to your
heart’s content. Oh that I could see burnt and turned to ashes the
first man that meddled with knight-errantry or at any rate the first
who chose to be squire to such fools as all the knights-errant of past
times must have been! Of those of the present day I say nothing,
because, as your worship is one of them, I respect them, and because I
know your worship knows a point more than the devil in all you say and
think.”

“I would lay a good wager with you, Sancho,” said Don Quixote, “that
now that you are talking on without anyone to stop you, you don’t feel
a pain in your whole body. Talk away, my son, say whatever comes into
your head or mouth, for so long as you feel no pain, the irritation
your impertinences give me will be a pleasure to me; and if you are so
anxious to go home to your wife and children, God forbid that I should
prevent you; you have money of mine; see how long it is since we left
our village this third time, and how much you can and ought to earn
every month, and pay yourself out of your own hand.”

“When I worked for Tom Carrasco, the father of the bachelor Samson
Carrasco that your worship knows,” replied Sancho, “I used to earn two
ducats a month besides my food; I can’t tell what I can earn with your
worship, though I know a knight-errant’s squire has harder times of it
than he who works for a farmer; for after all, we who work for farmers,
however much we toil all day, at the worst, at night, we have our olla
supper and sleep in a bed, which I have not slept in since I have been
in your worship’s service, if it wasn’t the short time we were in Don
Diego de Miranda’s house, and the feast I had with the skimmings I took
off Camacho’s pots, and what I ate, drank, and slept in Basilio’s
house; all the rest of the time I have been sleeping on the hard ground
under the open sky, exposed to what they call the inclemencies of
heaven, keeping life in me with scraps of cheese and crusts of bread,
and drinking water either from the brooks or from the springs we come
to on these by-paths we travel.”

“I own, Sancho,” said Don Quixote, “that all thou sayest is true; how
much, thinkest thou, ought I to give thee over an