on Quixote, “for being musicians and singers are people
sent to the galleys too?”

“Yes, sir,” answered the galley slave, “for there is nothing worse than
singing under suffering.”

“On the contrary, I have heard say,” said Don Quixote, “that he who
sings scares away his woes.”

“Here it is the reverse,” said the galley slave; “for he who sings once
weeps all his life.”

“I do not understand it,” said Don Quixote; but one of the guards said
to him, “Sir, to sing under suffering means with the _non sancta_
fraternity to confess under torture; they put this sinner to the
torture and he confessed his crime, which was being a cuatrero, that is
a cattle-stealer, and on his confession they sentenced him to six years
in the galleys, besides two hundred lashes that he has already had on
the back; and he is always dejected and downcast because the other
thieves that were left behind and that march here ill-treat, and snub,
and jeer, and despise him for confessing and not having spirit enough
to say nay; for, say they, ‘nay’ has no more letters in it than ‘yea,’
and a culprit is well off when life or death with him depends on his
own tongue and not on that of witnesses or evidence; and to my thinking
they are not very far out.”

“And I think so too,” answered Don Quixote; then passing on to the
third he asked him what he had asked the others, and the man answered
very readily and unconcernedly, “I am going for five years to their
ladyships the gurapas for the want of ten ducats.”

“I will give twenty with pleasure to get you out of that trouble,” said
Don Quixote.

“That,” said the galley slave, “is like a man having money at sea when
he is dying of hunger and has no way of buying what he wants; I say so
because if at the right time I had had those twenty ducats that your
worship now offers me, I would have greased the notary’s pen and
freshened up the attorney’s wit with them, so that to-day I should be
in the middle of the plaza of the Zocodover at Toledo, and not on this
road coupled like a greyhound. But God is great; patience—there, that’s
enough of it.”

Don Quixote passed on to the fourth, a man of venerable aspect with a
white beard falling below his breast, who on hearing himself asked the
reason of his being there began to weep without answering a word, but
the fifth acted as his tongue and said, “This worthy man is going to
the galleys for four years, after having gone the rounds in ceremony
and on horseback.”

“That means,” said Sancho Panza, “as I take it, to have been exposed to
shame in public.”

“Just so,” replied the galley slave, “and the offence for which they
gave him that punishment was having been an ear-broker, nay
body-broker; I mean, in short, that this gentleman goes as a pimp, and
for having besides a certain touch of the sorcerer about him.”

“If that touch had not been thrown in,” said Don Quixote, “he would not
deserve, for mere pimping, to row in the galleys, but rather to command
and be admiral of them; for the office of pimp is no ordinary one,
being the office of persons of discretion, one very necessary in a
well-ordered state, and only to be exercised by persons of good birth;
nay, there ought to be an inspector and overseer of them, as in other
offices, and recognised number, as with the brokers on change; in this
way many of the evils would be avoided which are caused by this office
and calling being in the hands of stupid and ignorant people, such as
women more or less silly, and pages and jesters of little standing and
experience, who on the most urgent occasions, and when ingenuity of
contrivance is needed, let the crumbs freeze on the way to their
mouths, and know not which is their right hand. I should like to go
farther, and give reasons to show that it is advisable to choose those
who are to hold so necessary an office in the state, but this is not
the fit place for it; some day I will expound the matter to someone
able