ed, and looking from one to another asked if this
dinner was to be eaten after the fashion of a jugglery trick.

To this he with the wand replied, “It is not to be eaten, señor
governor, except as is usual and customary in other islands where there
are governors. I, señor, am a physician, and I am paid a salary in this
island to serve its governors as such, and I have a much greater regard
for their health than for my own, studying day and night and making
myself acquainted with the governor’s constitution, in order to be able
to cure him when he falls sick. The chief thing I have to do is to
attend at his dinners and suppers and allow him to eat what appears to
me to be fit for him, and keep from him what I think will do him harm
and be injurious to his stomach; and therefore I ordered that plate of
fruit to be removed as being too moist, and that other dish I ordered
to be removed as being too hot and containing many spices that
stimulate thirst; for he who drinks much kills and consumes the radical
moisture wherein life consists.”

“Well then,” said Sancho, “that dish of roast partridges there that
seems so savoury will not do me any harm.”

To this the physician replied, “Of those my lord the governor shall not
eat so long as I live.”

“Why so?” said Sancho.

“Because,” replied the doctor, “our master Hippocrates, the polestar
and beacon of medicine, says in one of his aphorisms _omnis saturatio
mala, perdicis autem pessima_, which means ‘all repletion is bad, but
that of partridge is the worst of all.”

“In that case,” said Sancho, “let señor doctor see among the dishes
that are on the table what will do me most good and least harm, and let
me eat it, without tapping it with his stick; for by the life of the
governor, and so may God suffer me to enjoy it, but I’m dying of
hunger; and in spite of the doctor and all he may say, to deny me food
is the way to take my life instead of prolonging it.”

“Your worship is right, señor governor,” said the physician; “and
therefore your worship, I consider, should not eat of those stewed
rabbits there, because it is a furry kind of food; if that veal were
not roasted and served with pickles, you might try it; but it is out of
the question.”

“That big dish that is smoking farther off,” said Sancho, “seems to me
to be an olla podrida, and out of the diversity of things in such
ollas, I can’t fail to light upon something tasty and good for me.”



p47b.jpg (372K)

Full Size



“_Absit_,” said the doctor; “far from us be any such base thought!
There is nothing in the world less nourishing than an olla podrida; to
canons, or rectors of colleges, or peasants’ weddings with your ollas
podridas, but let us have none of them on the tables of governors,
where everything that is present should be delicate and refined; and
the reason is, that always, everywhere and by everybody, simple
medicines are more esteemed than compound ones, for we cannot go wrong
in those that are simple, while in the compound we may, by merely
altering the quantity of the things composing them. But what I am of
opinion the governor should eat now in order to preserve and fortify
his health is a hundred or so of wafer cakes and a few thin slices of
conserve of quinces, which will settle his stomach and help his
digestion.”

Sancho on hearing this threw himself back in his chair and surveyed the
doctor steadily, and in a solemn tone asked him what his name was and
where he had studied.

He replied, “My name, señor governor, is Doctor Pedro Recio de Aguero I
am a native of a place called Tirteafuera which lies between Caracuel
and Almodóvar del Campo, on the right-hand side, and I have the degree
of doctor from the university of Osuna.”

To which Sancho, glowing all over with rage, returned, “Then let Doctor
Pedro Recio de Malaguero, native of Tirteafuera, a place that’s on the
right-hand side as we go from Caracuel to Almodóvar del Campo, g