ierres carried off the fair Magalona; which said
horse is guided by a peg he has in his forehead that serves for a
bridle, and flies through the air with such rapidity that you would
fancy the very devils were carrying him. This horse, according to
ancient tradition, was made by Merlin. He lent him to Pierres, who was
a friend of his, and who made long journeys with him, and, as has been
said, carried off the fair Magalona, bearing her through the air on its
haunches and making all who beheld them from the earth gape with
astonishment; and he never lent him save to those whom he loved or
those who paid him well; and since the great Pierres we know of no one
having mounted him until now. From him Malambruno stole him by his
magic art, and he has him now in his possession, and makes use of him
in his journeys which he constantly makes through different parts of
the world; he is here to-day, to-morrow in France, and the next day in
Potosi; and the best of it is the said horse neither eats nor sleeps
nor wears out shoes, and goes at an ambling pace through the air
without wings, so that he whom he has mounted upon him can carry a cup
full of water in his hand without spilling a drop, so smoothly and
easily does he go, for which reason the fair Magalona enjoyed riding
him greatly.”

“For going smoothly and easily,” said Sancho at this, “give me my
Dapple, though he can’t go through the air; but on the ground I’ll back
him against all the amblers in the world.”

They all laughed, and the Distressed One continued: “And this same
horse, if so be that Malambruno is disposed to put an end to our
sufferings, will be here before us ere the night shall have advanced
half an hour; for he announced to me that the sign he would give me
whereby I might know that I had found the knight I was in quest of,
would be to send me the horse wherever he might be, speedily and
promptly.”

“And how many is there room for on this horse?” asked Sancho.

“Two,” said the Distressed One, “one in the saddle, and the other on
the croup; and generally these two are knight and squire, when there is
no damsel that’s being carried off.”

“I’d like to know, Señora Distressed One,” said Sancho, “what is the
name of this horse?”

“His name,” said the Distressed One, “is not the same as Bellerophon’s
horse that was called Pegasus, or Alexander the Great’s, called
Bucephalus, or Orlando Furioso’s, the name of which was Brigliador, nor
yet Bayard, the horse of Reinaldos of Montalvan, nor Frontino like
Ruggiero’s, nor Bootes or Peritoa, as they say the horses of the sun
were called, nor is he called Orelia, like the horse on which the
unfortunate Rodrigo, the last king of the Goths, rode to the battle
where he lost his life and his kingdom.”

“I’ll bet,” said Sancho, “that as they have given him none of these
famous names of well-known horses, no more have they given him the name
of my master’s Rocinante, which for being apt surpasses all that have
been mentioned.”

“That is true,” said the bearded countess, “still it fits him very
well, for he is called Clavileño the Swift, which name is in accordance
with his being made of wood, with the peg he has in his forehead, and
with the swift pace at which he travels; and so, as far as name goes,
he may compare with the famous Rocinante.”

“I have nothing to say against his name,” said Sancho; “but with what
sort of bridle or halter is he managed?”

“I have said already,” said the Trifaldi, “that it is with a peg, by
turning which to one side or the other the knight who rides him makes
him go as he pleases, either through the upper air, or skimming and
almost sweeping the earth, or else in that middle course that is sought
and followed in all well-regulated proceedings.”

“I’d like to see him,” said Sancho; “but to fancy I’m going to mount
him, either in the saddle or on the croup, is to ask pears of the elm
tree. A good joke indeed! I can hardly keep my se