of the room and posted themselves so close to it that they could
hear all that was said inside. But when the duchess heard how the
Rodriguez had made public the Aranjuez of her issues she could not
restrain herself, nor Altisidora either; and so, filled with rage and
thirsting for vengeance, they burst into the room and tormented Don
Quixote and flogged the duenna in the manner already described; for
indignities offered to their charms and self-esteem mightily provoke
the anger of women and make them eager for revenge. The duchess told
the duke what had happened, and he was much amused by it; and she, in
pursuance of her design of making merry and diverting herself with Don
Quixote, despatched the page who had played the part of Dulcinea in the
negotiations for her disenchantment (which Sancho Panza in the cares of
government had forgotten all about) to Teresa Panza his wife with her
husband’s letter and another from herself, and also a great string of
fine coral beads as a present.

Now the history says this page was very sharp and quick-witted; and
eager to serve his lord and lady he set off very willingly for Sancho’s
village. Before he entered it he observed a number of women washing in
a brook, and asked them if they could tell him whether there lived
there a woman of the name of Teresa Panza, wife of one Sancho Panza,
squire to a knight called Don Quixote of La Mancha. At the question a
young girl who was washing stood up and said, “Teresa Panza is my
mother, and that Sancho is my father, and that knight is our master.”

“Well then, miss,” said the page, “come and show me where your mother
is, for I bring her a letter and a present from your father.”

“That I will with all my heart, señor,” said the girl, who seemed to be
about fourteen, more or less; and leaving the clothes she was washing
to one of her companions, and without putting anything on her head or
feet, for she was bare-legged and had her hair hanging about her, away
she skipped in front of the page’s horse, saying, “Come, your worship,
our house is at the entrance of the town, and my mother is there,
sorrowful enough at not having had any news of my father this ever so
long.”

“Well,” said the page, “I am bringing her such good news that she will
have reason to thank God.”

And then, skipping, running, and capering, the girl reached the town,
but before going into the house she called out at the door, “Come out,
mother Teresa, come out, come out; here’s a gentleman with letters and
other things from my good father.” At these words her mother Teresa
Panza came out spinning a bundle of flax, in a grey petticoat (so short
was it one would have fancied “they to her shame had cut it short”), a
grey bodice of the same stuff, and a smock. She was not very old,
though plainly past forty, strong, healthy, vigorous, and sun-dried;
and seeing her daughter and the page on horseback, she exclaimed,
“What’s this, child? What gentleman is this?”

“A servant of my lady, Doña Teresa Panza,” replied the page; and
suiting the action to the word he flung himself off his horse, and with
great humility advanced to kneel before the lady Teresa, saying, “Let
me kiss your hand, Señora Doña Teresa, as the lawful and only wife of
Señor Don Sancho Panza, rightful governor of the island of Barataria.”

“Ah, señor, get up, do that,” said Teresa; “for I’m not a bit of a
court lady, but only a poor country woman, the daughter of a
clodcrusher, and the wife of a squire-errant and not of any governor at
all.”

“You are,” said the page, “the most worthy wife of a most arch-worthy
governor; and as a proof of what I say accept this letter and this
present;” and at the same time he took out of his pocket a string of
coral beads with gold clasps, and placed it on her neck, and said,
“This letter is from his lordship the governor, and the other as well
as these coral beads from my lady the duchess, who sends me to your
worship.”
