 unfair and nothing concealed to make the combatants stumble
or fall; then the duennas entered and seated themselves, enveloped in
mantles covering their eyes, nay even their bosoms, and displaying no
slight emotion as Don Quixote appeared in the lists. Shortly
afterwards, accompanied by several trumpets and mounted on a powerful
steed that threatened to crush the whole place, the great lacquey
Tosilos made his appearance on one side of the courtyard with his visor
down and stiffly cased in a suit of stout shining armour. The horse was
a manifest Frieslander, broad-backed and flea-bitten, and with half a
hundred of wool hanging to each of his fetlocks. The gallant combatant
came well primed by his master the duke as to how he was to bear
himself against the valiant Don Quixote of La Mancha; being warned that
he must on no account slay him, but strive to shirk the first encounter
so as to avoid the risk of killing him, as he was sure to do if he met
him full tilt. He crossed the courtyard at a walk, and coming to where
the duennas were placed stopped to look at her who demanded him for a
husband; the marshal of the field summoned Don Quixote, who had already
presented himself in the courtyard, and standing by the side of Tosilos
he addressed the duennas, and asked them if they consented that Don
Quixote of La Mancha should do battle for their right. They said they
did, and that whatever he should do in that behalf they declared
rightly done, final and valid. By this time the duke and duchess had
taken their places in a gallery commanding the enclosure, which was
filled to overflowing with a multitude of people eager to see this
perilous and unparalleled encounter. The conditions of the combat were
that if Don Quixote proved the victor his antagonist was to marry the
daughter of Doña Rodriguez; but if he should be vanquished his opponent
was released from the promise that was claimed against him and from all
obligations to give satisfaction. The master of the ceremonies
apportioned the sun to them, and stationed them, each on the spot where
he was to stand. The drums beat, the sound of the trumpets filled the
air, the earth trembled under foot, the hearts of the gazing crowd were
full of anxiety, some hoping for a happy issue, some apprehensive of an
untoward ending to the affair, and lastly, Don Quixote, commending
himself with all his heart to God our Lord and to the lady Dulcinea del
Toboso, stood waiting for them to give the necessary signal for the
onset. Our lacquey, however, was thinking of something very different;
he only thought of what I am now going to mention.

It seems that as he stood contemplating his enemy she struck him as the
most beautiful woman he had ever seen all his life; and the little
blind boy whom in our streets they commonly call Love had no mind to
let slip the chance of triumphing over a lacquey heart, and adding it
to the list of his trophies; and so, stealing gently upon him unseen,
he drove a dart two yards long into the poor lacquey’s left side and
pierced his heart through and through; which he was able to do quite at
his ease, for Love is invisible, and comes in and goes out as he likes,
without anyone calling him to account for what he does. Well then, when
they gave the signal for the onset our lacquey was in an ecstasy,
musing upon the beauty of her whom he had already made mistress of his
liberty, and so he paid no attention to the sound of the trumpet,
unlike Don Quixote, who was off the instant he heard it, and, at the
highest speed Rocinante was capable of, set out to meet his enemy, his
good squire Sancho shouting lustily as he saw him start, “God guide
thee, cream and flower of knights-errant! God give thee the victory,
for thou hast the right on thy side!” But though Tosilos saw Don
Quixote coming at him he never stirred a step from the spot where he
was posted; and instead of doing so called loudly to the marshal of the
fiel