ee to give liveries to thy servants, give them respectable and
serviceable, rather than showy and gay ones, and divide them between
thy servants and the poor; that is to say, if thou canst clothe six
pages, clothe three and three poor men, and thus thou wilt have pages
for heaven and pages for earth; the vainglorious never think of this
new mode of giving liveries.

“Eat not garlic nor onions, lest they find out thy boorish origin by
the smell; walk slowly and speak deliberately, but not in such a way as
to make it seem thou art listening to thyself, for all affectation is
bad.

“Dine sparingly and sup more sparingly still; for the health of the
whole body is forged in the workshop of the stomach.

“Be temperate in drinking, bearing in mind that wine in excess keeps
neither secrets nor promises.

“Take care, Sancho, not to chew on both sides, and not to eruct in
anybody’s presence.”

“Eruct!” said Sancho; “I don’t know what that means.”

“To eruct, Sancho,” said Don Quixote, “means to belch, and that is one
of the filthiest words in the Spanish language, though a very
expressive one; and therefore nice folk have had recourse to the Latin,
and instead of belch say eruct, and instead of belches say eructations;
and if some do not understand these terms it matters little, for custom
will bring them into use in the course of time, so that they will be
readily understood; this is the way a language is enriched; custom and
the public are all-powerful there.”

“In truth, señor,” said Sancho, “one of the counsels and cautions I
mean to bear in mind shall be this, not to belch, for I’m constantly
doing it.”

“Eruct, Sancho, not belch,” said Don Quixote.

“Eruct, I shall say henceforth, and I swear not to forget it,” said
Sancho.

“Likewise, Sancho,” said Don Quixote, “thou must not mingle such a
quantity of proverbs in thy discourse as thou dost; for though proverbs
are short maxims, thou dost drag them in so often by the head and
shoulders that they savour more of nonsense than of maxims.”

“God alone can cure that,” said Sancho; “for I have more proverbs in me
than a book, and when I speak they come so thick together into my mouth
that they fall to fighting among themselves to get out; that’s why my
tongue lets fly the first that come, though they may not be pat to the
purpose. But I’ll take care henceforward to use such as befit the
dignity of my office; for ‘in a house where there’s plenty, supper is
soon cooked,’ and ‘he who binds does not wrangle,’ and ‘the
bell-ringer’s in a safe berth,’ and ‘giving and keeping require
brains.’”

“That’s it, Sancho!” said Don Quixote; “pack, tack, string proverbs
together; nobody is hindering thee! ‘My mother beats me, and I go on
with my tricks.’ I am bidding thee avoid proverbs, and here in a second
thou hast shot out a whole litany of them, which have as much to do
with what we are talking about as ‘over the hills of Úbeda.’ Mind,
Sancho, I do not say that a proverb aptly brought in is objectionable;
but to pile up and string together proverbs at random makes
conversation dull and vulgar.

“When thou ridest on horseback, do not go lolling with thy body on the
back of the saddle, nor carry thy legs stiff or sticking out from the
horse’s belly, nor yet sit so loosely that one would suppose thou wert
on Dapple; for the seat on a horse makes gentlemen of some and grooms
of others.

“Be moderate in thy sleep; for he who does not rise early does not get
the benefit of the day; and remember, Sancho, diligence is the mother
of good fortune, and indolence, its opposite, never yet attained the
object of an honest ambition.

“The last counsel I will give thee now, though it does not tend to
bodily improvement, I would have thee carry carefully in thy memory,
for I believe it will be no less useful to thee than those I have given
thee already, and it is this—never engage in a dispute about families,
at least in the way of com