s own village, and not leave it for a whole year, by which time he
might be cured. But fate ordered it otherwise, for he vanquished me and
unhorsed me, and so my plan failed. He went his way, and I came back
conquered, covered with shame, and sorely bruised by my fall, which was
a particularly dangerous one. But this did not quench my desire to meet
him again and overcome him, as you have seen to-day. And as he is so
scrupulous in his observance of the laws of knight-errantry, he will,
no doubt, in order to keep his word, obey the injunction I have laid
upon him. This, señor, is how the matter stands, and I have nothing
more to tell you. I implore of you not to betray me, or tell Don
Quixote who I am; so that my honest endeavours may be successful, and
that a man of excellent wits—were he only rid of the fooleries of
chivalry—may get them back again.”

“O señor,” said Don Antonio, “may God forgive you the wrong you have
done the whole world in trying to bring the most amusing madman in it
back to his senses. Do you not see, señor, that the gain by Don
Quixote’s sanity can never equal the enjoyment his crazes give? But my
belief is that all the señor bachelor’s pains will be of no avail to
bring a man so hopelessly cracked to his senses again; and if it were
not uncharitable, I would say may Don Quixote never be cured, for by
his recovery we lose not only his own drolleries, but his squire Sancho
Panza’s too, any one of which is enough to turn melancholy itself into
merriment. However, I’ll hold my peace and say nothing to him, and
we’ll see whether I am right in my suspicion that Señor Carrasco’s
efforts will be fruitless.”

The bachelor replied that at all events the affair promised well, and
he hoped for a happy result from it; and putting his services at Don
Antonio’s commands he took his leave of him; and having had his armour
packed at once upon a mule, he rode away from the city the same day on
the horse he rode to battle, and returned to his own country without
meeting any adventure calling for record in this veracious history.

Don Antonio reported to the viceroy what Carrasco told him, and the
viceroy was not very well pleased to hear it, for with Don Quixote’s
retirement there was an end to the amusement of all who knew anything
of his mad doings.

Six days did Don Quixote keep his bed, dejected, melancholy, moody and
out of sorts, brooding over the unhappy event of his defeat. Sancho
strove to comfort him, and among other things he said to him, “Hold up
your head, señor, and be of good cheer if you can, and give thanks to
heaven that if you have had a tumble to the ground you have not come
off with a broken rib; and, as you know that ‘where they give they
take,’ and that ‘there are not always fletches where there are pegs,’ a
fig for the doctor, for there’s no need of him to cure this ailment.
Let us go home, and give over going about in search of adventures in
strange lands and places; rightly looked at, it is I that am the
greater loser, though it is your worship that has had the worse usage.
With the government I gave up all wish to be a governor again, but I
did not give up all longing to be a count; and that will never come to
pass if your worship gives up becoming a king by renouncing the calling
of chivalry; and so my hopes are going to turn into smoke.”

“Peace, Sancho,” said Don Quixote; “thou seest my suspension and
retirement is not to exceed a year; I shall soon return to my honoured
calling, and I shall not be at a loss for a kingdom to win and a county
to bestow on thee.”

“May God hear it and sin be deaf,” said Sancho; “I have always heard
say that ‘a good hope is better than a bad holding.”

As they were talking Don Antonio came in looking extremely pleased and
exclaiming, “Reward me for my good news, Señor Don Quixote! Don
Gregorio and the renegade who went for him have come ashore—ashore do I
say? They are by this time in the viceroy