en,” said Sancho, “what I am going to say is so true that my
master Don Quixote, who is here present, will keep me from lying.”

“Lie as much as thou wilt for all I care, Sancho,” said Don Quixote,
“for I am not going to stop thee, but consider what thou art going to
say.”

“I have so considered and reconsidered,” said Sancho, “that the
bell-ringer’s in a safe berth; as will be seen by what follows.”

“It would be well,” said Don Quixote, “if your highnesses would order
them to turn out this idiot, for he will talk a heap of nonsense.”

“By the life of the duke, Sancho shall not be taken away from me for a
moment,” said the duchess; “I am very fond of him, for I know he is
very discreet.”

“Discreet be the days of your holiness,” said Sancho, “for the good
opinion you have of my wit, though there’s none in me; but the story I
want to tell is this. There was an invitation given by a gentleman of
my town, a very rich one, and one of quality, for he was one of the
Alamos of Medina del Campo, and married to Doña Mencia de Quiñones, the
daughter of Don Alonso de Marañon, Knight of the Order of Santiago,
that was drowned at the Herradura—him there was that quarrel about
years ago in our village, that my master Don Quixote was mixed up in,
to the best of my belief, that Tomasillo the scapegrace, the son of
Balbastro the smith, was wounded in.—Isn’t all this true, master mine?
As you live, say so, that these gentlefolk may not take me for some
lying chatterer.”

“So far,” said the ecclesiastic, “I take you to be more a chatterer
than a liar; but I don’t know what I shall take you for by-and-by.”

“Thou citest so many witnesses and proofs, Sancho,” said Don Quixote,
“that I have no choice but to say thou must be telling the truth; go
on, and cut the story short, for thou art taking the way not to make an
end for two days to come.”

“He is not to cut it short,” said the duchess; “on the contrary, for my
gratification, he is to tell it as he knows it, though he should not
finish it these six days; and if he took so many they would be to me
the pleasantest I ever spent.”

“Well then, sirs, I say,” continued Sancho, “that this same gentleman,
whom I know as well as I do my own hands, for it’s not a bowshot from
my house to his, invited a poor but respectable labourer—”

“Get on, brother,” said the churchman; “at the rate you are going you
will not stop with your story short of the next world.”

“I’ll stop less than half-way, please God,” said Sancho; “and so I say
this labourer, coming to the house of the gentleman I spoke of that
invited him—rest his soul, he is now dead; and more by token he died
the death of an angel, so they say; for I was not there, for just at
that time I had gone to reap at Tembleque—”

“As you live, my son,” said the churchman, “make haste back from
Tembleque, and finish your story without burying the gentleman, unless
you want to make more funerals.”

“Well then, it so happened,” said Sancho, “that as the pair of them
were going to sit down to table—and I think I can see them now plainer
than ever—”

Great was the enjoyment the duke and duchess derived from the
irritation the worthy churchman showed at the long-winded, halting way
Sancho had of telling his story, while Don Quixote was chafing with
rage and vexation.

“So, as I was saying,” continued Sancho, “as the pair of them were
going to sit down to table, as I said, the labourer insisted upon the
gentleman’s taking the head of the table, and the gentleman insisted
upon the labourer’s taking it, as his orders should be obeyed in his
house; but the labourer, who plumed himself on his politeness and good
breeding, would not on any account, until the gentleman, out of
patience, putting his hands on his shoulders, compelled him by force to
sit down, saying, ‘Sit down, you stupid lout, for wherever I sit will
be the head to you; and that’s the story, and, troth, I think it hasn’t
been bro