 lost, lies
buried at that spot; “cava” in their language meaning “wicked woman,”
and “rumia” “Christian;” moreover, they count it unlucky to anchor
there when necessity compels them, and they never do so otherwise. For
us, however, it was not the resting-place of the wicked woman but a
haven of safety for our relief, so much had the sea now got up. We
posted a look-out on shore, and never let the oars out of our hands,
and ate of the stores the renegade had laid in, imploring God and Our
Lady with all our hearts to help and protect us, that we might give a
happy ending to a beginning so prosperous. At the entreaty of Zoraida
orders were given to set on shore her father and the other Moors who
were still bound, for she could not endure, nor could her tender heart
bear to see her father in bonds and her fellow-countrymen prisoners
before her eyes. We promised her to do this at the moment of departure,
for as it was uninhabited we ran no risk in releasing them at that
place.

Our prayers were not so far in vain as to be unheard by Heaven, for
after a while the wind changed in our favour, and made the sea calm,
inviting us once more to resume our voyage with a good heart. Seeing
this we unbound the Moors, and one by one put them on shore, at which
they were filled with amazement; but when we came to land Zoraida’s
father, who had now completely recovered his senses, he said:

“Why is it, think ye, Christians, that this wicked woman is rejoiced at
your giving me my liberty? Think ye it is because of the affection she
bears me? Nay verily, it is only because of the hindrance my presence
offers to the execution of her base designs. And think not that it is
her belief that yours is better than ours that has led her to change
her religion; it is only because she knows that immodesty is more
freely practised in your country than in ours.” Then turning to
Zoraida, while I and another of the Christians held him fast by both
arms, lest he should do some mad act, he said to her, “Infamous girl,
misguided maiden, whither in thy blindness and madness art thou going
in the hands of these dogs, our natural enemies? Cursed be the hour
when I begot thee! Cursed the luxury and indulgence in which I reared
thee!”

But seeing that he was not likely soon to cease I made haste to put him
on shore, and thence he continued his maledictions and lamentations
aloud; calling on Mohammed to pray to Allah to destroy us, to confound
us, to make an end of us; and when, in consequence of having made sail,
we could no longer hear what he said we could see what he did; how he
plucked out his beard and tore his hair and lay writhing on the ground.
But once he raised his voice to such a pitch that we were able to hear
what he said. “Come back, dear daughter, come back to shore; I forgive
thee all; let those men have the money, for it is theirs now, and come
back to comfort thy sorrowing father, who will yield up his life on
this barren strand if thou dost leave him.”



c41e.jpg (281K)

Full Size




All this Zoraida heard, and heard with sorrow and tears, and all she
could say in answer was, “Allah grant that Lela Marien, who has made me
become a Christian, give thee comfort in thy sorrow, my father. Allah
knows that I could not do otherwise than I have done, and that these
Christians owe nothing to my will; for even had I wished not to
accompany them, but remain at home, it would have been impossible for
me, so eagerly did my soul urge me on to the accomplishment of this
purpose, which I feel to be as righteous as to thee, dear father, it
seems wicked.”

But neither could her father hear her nor we see him when she said
this; and so, while I consoled Zoraida, we turned our attention to our
voyage, in which a breeze from the right point so favoured us that we
made sure of finding ourselves off the coast of Spain on the morrow by
daybreak. But, as good seldom or never comes pure and unmixed, w