a met him, but found nothing there save freshly spilt blood;
looking all round, however, they descried some people on the slope of a
hill above them, and concluded, as indeed it proved to be, that it was
Don Vicente, whom either dead or alive his servants were removing to
attend to his wounds or to bury him. They made haste to overtake them,
which, as the party moved slowly, they were able to do with ease. They
found Don Vicente in the arms of his servants, whom he was entreating
in a broken feeble voice to leave him there to die, as the pain of his
wounds would not suffer him to go any farther. Claudia and Roque threw
themselves off their horses and advanced towards him; the servants were
overawed by the appearance of Roque, and Claudia was moved by the sight
of Don Vicente, and going up to him half tenderly half sternly, she
seized his hand and said to him, “Hadst thou given me this according to
our compact thou hadst never come to this pass.”

The wounded gentleman opened his all but closed eyes, and recognising
Claudia said, “I see clearly, fair and mistaken lady, that it is thou
that hast slain me, a punishment not merited or deserved by my feelings
towards thee, for never did I mean to, nor could I, wrong thee in
thought or deed.”

“It is not true, then,” said Claudia, “that thou wert going this
morning to marry Leonora the daughter of the rich Balvastro?”

“Assuredly not,” replied Don Vicente; “my cruel fortune must have
carried those tidings to thee to drive thee in thy jealousy to take my
life; and to assure thyself of this, press my hands and take me for thy
husband if thou wilt; I have no better satisfaction to offer thee for
the wrong thou fanciest thou hast received from me.”

Claudia wrung his hands, and her own heart was so wrung that she lay
fainting on the bleeding breast of Don Vicente, whom a death spasm
seized the same instant. Roque was in perplexity and knew not what to
do; the servants ran to fetch water to sprinkle their faces, and
brought some and bathed them with it. Claudia recovered from her
fainting fit, but not so Don Vicente from the paroxysm that had
overtaken him, for his life had come to an end. On perceiving this,
Claudia, when she had convinced herself that her beloved husband was no
more, rent the air with her sighs and made the heavens ring with her
lamentations; she tore her hair and scattered it to the winds, she beat
her face with her hands and showed all the signs of grief and sorrow
that could be conceived to come from an afflicted heart. “Cruel,
reckless woman!” she cried, “how easily wert thou moved to carry out a
thought so wicked! O furious force of jealousy, to what desperate
lengths dost thou lead those that give thee lodging in their bosoms! O
husband, whose unhappy fate in being mine hath borne thee from the
marriage bed to the grave!”

So vehement and so piteous were the lamentations of Claudia that they
drew tears from Roque’s eyes, unused as they were to shed them on any
occasion. The servants wept, Claudia swooned away again and again, and
the whole place seemed a field of sorrow and an abode of misfortune. In
the end Roque Guinart directed Don Vicente’s servants to carry his body
to his father’s village, which was close by, for burial. Claudia told
him she meant to go to a monastery of which an aunt of hers was abbess,
where she intended to pass her life with a better and everlasting
spouse. He applauded her pious resolution, and offered to accompany her
whithersoever she wished, and to protect her father against the kinsmen
of Don Vicente and all the world, should they seek to injure him.
Claudia would not on any account allow him to accompany her; and
thanking him for his offers as well as she could, took leave of him in
tears. The servants of Don Vicente carried away his body, and Roque
returned to his comrades, and so ended the love of Claudia Jeronima;
but what wonder, when it was the insuperable and crue