 the same bachelor or beneficiary is a greater friend
of Camacho’s than of Basilio’s, and that he is better at satire than at
vespers; he has introduced the accomplishments of Basilio and the
riches of Camacho very neatly into the dance.” Sancho Panza, who was
listening to all this, exclaimed, “The king is my cock; I stick to
Camacho.” “It is easy to see thou art a clown, Sancho,” said Don
Quixote, “and one of that sort that cry ‘Long life to the conqueror.’”

“I don’t know of what sort I am,” returned Sancho, “but I know very
well I’ll never get such elegant skimmings off Basilio’s pots as these
I have got off Camacho’s;” and he showed him the bucketful of geese and
hens, and seizing one began to eat with great gaiety and appetite,
saying, “A fig for the accomplishments of Basilio! As much as thou hast
so much art thou worth, and as much as thou art worth so much hast
thou. As a grandmother of mine used to say, there are only two families
in the world, the Haves and the Haven’ts; and she stuck to the Haves;
and to this day, Señor Don Quixote, people would sooner feel the pulse
of ‘Have,’ than of ‘Know;’ an ass covered with gold looks better than a
horse with a pack-saddle. So once more I say I stick to Camacho, the
bountiful skimmings of whose pots are geese and hens, hares and
rabbits; but of Basilio’s, if any ever come to hand, or even to foot,
they’ll be only rinsings.”

“Hast thou finished thy harangue, Sancho?” said Don Quixote. “Of course
I have finished it,” replied Sancho, “because I see your worship takes
offence at it; but if it was not for that, there was work enough cut
out for three days.”

“God grant I may see thee dumb before I die, Sancho,” said Don Quixote.

“At the rate we are going,” said Sancho, “I’ll be chewing clay before
your worship dies; and then, maybe, I’ll be so dumb that I’ll not say a
word until the end of the world, or, at least, till the day of
judgment.”

“Even should that happen, O Sancho,” said Don Quixote, “thy silence
will never come up to all thou hast talked, art talking, and wilt talk
all thy life; moreover, it naturally stands to reason, that my death
will come before thine; so I never expect to see thee dumb, not even
when thou art drinking or sleeping, and that is the utmost I can say.”

“In good faith, señor,” replied Sancho, “there’s no trusting that
fleshless one, I mean Death, who devours the lamb as soon as the sheep,
and, as I have heard our curate say, treads with equal foot upon the
lofty towers of kings and the lowly huts of the poor. That lady is more
mighty than dainty, she is in no way squeamish, she devours all and is
ready for all, and fills her alforjas with people of all sorts, ages,
and ranks. She is no reaper that sleeps out the noontide; at all times
she is reaping and cutting down, as well the dry grass as the green;
she never seems to chew, but bolts and swallows all that is put before
her, for she has a canine appetite that is never satisfied; and though
she has no belly, she shows she has a dropsy and is athirst to drink
the lives of all that live, as one would drink a jug of cold water.”

“Say no more, Sancho,” said Don Quixote at this; “don’t try to better
it, and risk a fall; for in truth what thou hast said about death in
thy rustic phrase is what a good preacher might have said. I tell thee,
Sancho, if thou hadst discretion equal to thy mother wit, thou mightst
take a pulpit in hand, and go about the world preaching fine sermons.”
“He preaches well who lives well,” said Sancho, “and I know no more
theology than that.”

“Nor needst thou,” said Don Quixote, “but I cannot conceive or make out
how it is that, the fear of God being the beginning of wisdom, thou,
who art more afraid of a lizard than of him, knowest so much.”

“Pass judgment on your chivalries, señor,” returned Sancho, “and don’t
set yourself up to judge of other men’s fears or braveries, for I am as
good a fearer of God as my ne