ar aside. Of all Byron’s melodious nonsense
about Don Quixote, the most nonsensical statement is that “’tis his
virtue makes him mad!” The exact opposite is the truth; it is his
madness makes him virtuous.

In the Second Part, Cervantes repeatedly reminds the reader, as if it
was a point upon which he was anxious there should be no mistake, that
his hero’s madness is strictly confined to delusions on the subject of
chivalry, and that on every other subject he is discreto, one, in fact,
whose faculty of discernment is in perfect order. The advantage of this
is that he is enabled to make use of Don Quixote as a mouthpiece for
his own reflections, and so, without seeming to digress, allow himself
the relief of digression when he requires it, as freely as in a
commonplace book.

It is true the amount of individuality bestowed upon Don Quixote is not
very great. There are some natural touches of character about him, such
as his mixture of irascibility and placability, and his curious
affection for Sancho together with his impatience of the squire’s
loquacity and impertinence; but in the main, apart from his craze, he
is little more than a thoughtful, cultured gentleman, with instinctive
good taste and a great deal of shrewdness and originality of mind.

As to Sancho, it is plain, from the concluding words of the preface to
the First Part, that he was a favourite with his creator even before he
had been taken into favour by the public. An inferior genius, taking
him in hand a second time, would very likely have tried to improve him
by making him more comical, clever, amiable, or virtuous. But Cervantes
was too true an artist to spoil his work in this way. Sancho, when he
reappears, is the old Sancho with the old familiar features; but with a
difference; they have been brought out more distinctly, but at the same
time with a careful avoidance of anything like caricature; the outline
has been filled in where filling in was necessary, and, vivified by a
few touches of a master’s hand, Sancho stands before us as he might in
a character portrait by Velazquez. He is a much more important and
prominent figure in the Second Part than in the First; indeed, it is
his matchless mendacity about Dulcinea that to a great extent supplies
the action of the story.

His development in this respect is as remarkable as in any other. In
the First Part he displays a great natural gift of lying. His lies are
not of the highly imaginative sort that liars in fiction commonly
indulge in; like Falstaff’s, they resemble the father that begets them;
they are simple, homely, plump lies; plain working lies, in short. But
in the service of such a master as Don Quixote he develops rapidly, as
we see when he comes to palm off the three country wenches as Dulcinea
and her ladies in waiting. It is worth noticing how, flushed by his
success in this instance, he is tempted afterwards to try a flight
beyond his powers in his account of the journey on Clavileño.

In the Second Part it is the spirit rather than the incidents of the
chivalry romances that is the subject of the burlesque. Enchantments of
the sort travestied in those of Dulcinea and the Trifaldi and the cave
of Montesinos play a leading part in the later and inferior romances,
and another distinguishing feature is caricatured in Don Quixote’s
blind adoration of Dulcinea. In the romances of chivalry love is either
a mere animalism or a fantastic idolatry. Only a coarse-minded man
would care to make merry with the former, but to one of Cervantes’
humour the latter was naturally an attractive subject for ridicule.
Like everything else in these romances, it is a gross exaggeration of
the real sentiment of chivalry, but its peculiar extravagance is
probably due to the influence of those masters of hyperbole, the
Provencal poets. When a troubadour professed his readiness to obey his
lady in all things, he made it incumbent upon the next comer, if he
wi