he Princess Micomicona grants me permission to do so, I give
him the lie, challenge him and defy him to single combat.”

The newly arrived travellers were amazed at the words of Don Quixote;
but the landlord removed their surprise by telling them who he was, and
not to mind him as he was out of his senses. They then asked the
landlord if by any chance a youth of about fifteen years of age had
come to that inn, one dressed like a muleteer, and of such and such an
appearance, describing that of Doña Clara’s lover. The landlord replied
that there were so many people in the inn he had not noticed the person
they were inquiring for; but one of them observing the coach in which
the Judge had come, said, “He is here no doubt, for this is the coach
he is following: let one of us stay at the gate, and the rest go in to
look for him; or indeed it would be as well if one of us went round the
inn, lest he should escape over the wall of the yard.” “So be it,” said
another; and while two of them went in, one remained at the gate and
the other made the circuit of the inn; observing all which, the
landlord was unable to conjecture for what reason they were taking all
these precautions, though he understood they were looking for the youth
whose description they had given him.

It was by this time broad daylight; and for that reason, as well as in
consequence of the noise Don Quixote had made, everybody was awake and
up, but particularly Doña Clara and Dorothea; for they had been able to
sleep but badly that night, the one from agitation at having her lover
so near her, the other from curiosity to see him. Don Quixote, when he
saw that not one of the four travellers took any notice of him or
replied to his challenge, was furious and ready to die with indignation
and wrath; and if he could have found in the ordinances of chivalry
that it was lawful for a knight-errant to undertake or engage in
another enterprise, when he had plighted his word and faith not to
involve himself in any until he had made an end of the one to which he
was pledged, he would have attacked the whole of them, and would have
made them return an answer in spite of themselves. But considering that
it would not become him, nor be right, to begin any new emprise until
he had established Micomicona in her kingdom, he was constrained to
hold his peace and wait quietly to see what would be the upshot of the
proceedings of those same travellers; one of whom found the youth they
were seeking lying asleep by the side of a muleteer, without a thought
of anyone coming in search of him, much less finding him.

The man laid hold of him by the arm, saying, “It becomes you well
indeed, Señor Don Luis, to be in the dress you wear, and well the bed
in which I find you agrees with the luxury in which your mother reared
you.”

The youth rubbed his sleepy eyes and stared for a while at him who held
him, but presently recognised him as one of his father’s servants, at
which he was so taken aback that for some time he could not find or
utter a word; while the servant went on to say, “There is nothing for
it now, Señor Don Luis, but to submit quietly and return home, unless
it is your wish that my lord, your father, should take his departure
for the other world, for nothing else can be the consequence of the
grief he is in at your absence.”

“But how did my father know that I had gone this road and in this
dress?” said Don Luis.

“It was a student to whom you confided your intentions,” answered the
servant, “that disclosed them, touched with pity at the distress he saw
your father suffer on missing you; he therefore despatched four of his
servants in quest of you, and here we all are at your service, better
pleased than you can imagine that we shall return so soon and be able
to restore you to those eyes that so yearn for you.”

“That shall be as I please, or as heaven orders,” returned Don Luis.

“What can you please or heaven or