ough, as has been said, he
hated being a governor, still he had a longing to be giving orders and
finding himself obeyed once more; this is the misfortune that being in
authority, even in jest, brings with it.

To resume; that afternoon their host Don Antonio Moreno and his two
friends, with Don Quixote and Sancho, went to the galleys. The
commandant had been already made aware of his good fortune in seeing
two such famous persons as Don Quixote and Sancho, and the instant they
came to the shore all the galleys struck their awnings and the clarions
rang out. A skiff covered with rich carpets and cushions of crimson
velvet was immediately lowered into the water, and as Don Quixote
stepped on board of it, the leading galley fired her gangway gun, and
the other galleys did the same; and as he mounted the starboard ladder
the whole crew saluted him (as is the custom when a personage of
distinction comes on board a galley) by exclaiming “Hu, hu, hu,” three
times. The general, for so we shall call him, a Valencian gentleman of
rank, gave him his hand and embraced him, saying, “I shall mark this
day with a white stone as one of the happiest I can expect to enjoy in
my lifetime, since I have seen Señor Don Quixote of La Mancha, pattern
and image wherein we see contained and condensed all that is worthy in
knight-errantry.”

Don Quixote delighted beyond measure with such a lordly reception,
replied to him in words no less courteous. All then proceeded to the
poop, which was very handsomely decorated, and seated themselves on the
bulwark benches; the boatswain passed along the gangway and piped all
hands to strip, which they did in an instant. Sancho, seeing such a
number of men stripped to the skin, was taken aback, and still more
when he saw them spread the awning so briskly that it seemed to him as
if all the devils were at work at it; but all this was cakes and fancy
bread to what I am going to tell now. Sancho was seated on the
captain’s stage, close to the aftermost rower on the right-hand side.
He, previously instructed in what he was to do, laid hold of Sancho,
hoisting him up in his arms, and the whole crew, who were standing
ready, beginning on the right, proceeded to pass him on, whirling him
along from hand to hand and from bench to bench with such rapidity that
it took the sight out of poor Sancho’s eyes, and he made quite sure
that the devils themselves were flying away with him; nor did they
leave off with him until they had sent him back along the left side and
deposited him on the poop; and the poor fellow was left bruised and
breathless and all in a sweat, and unable to comprehend what it was
that had happened to him.

Don Quixote when he saw Sancho’s flight without wings asked the general
if this was a usual ceremony with those who came on board the galleys
for the first time; for, if so, as he had no intention of adopting them
as a profession, he had no mind to perform such feats of agility, and
if anyone offered to lay hold of him to whirl him about, he vowed to
God he would kick his soul out; and as he said this he stood up and
clapped his hand upon his sword. At this instant they struck the awning
and lowered the yard with a prodigious rattle. Sancho thought heaven
was coming off its hinges and going to fall on his head, and full of
terror he ducked it and buried it between his knees; nor were Don
Quixote’s knees altogether under control, for he too shook a little,
squeezed his shoulders together and lost colour. The crew then hoisted
the yard with the same rapidity and clatter as when they lowered it,
all the while keeping silence as though they had neither voice nor
breath. The boatswain gave the signal to weigh anchor, and leaping upon
the middle of the gangway began to lay on to the shoulders of the crew
with his courbash or whip, and to haul out gradually to sea.

When Sancho saw so many red feet (for such he took the oars to be)
moving all togeth