arried lances and bucklers, and were in very warlike guise. Don
Quixote turned to Sancho and said, “If I could make use of my weapons,
and my promise had not tied my hands, I would count this host that
comes against us but cakes and fancy bread; but perhaps it may prove
something different from what we apprehend.” The men on horseback now
came up, and raising their lances surrounded Don Quixote in silence,
and pointed them at his back and breast, menacing him with death. One
of those on foot, putting his finger to his lips as a sign to him to be
silent, seized Rocinante’s bridle and drew him out of the road, and the
others driving Sancho and Dapple before them, and all maintaining a
strange silence, followed in the steps of the one who led Don Quixote.
The latter two or three times attempted to ask where they were taking
him to and what they wanted, but the instant he began to open his lips
they threatened to close them with the points of their lances; and
Sancho fared the same way, for the moment he seemed about to speak one
of those on foot punched him with a goad, and Dapple likewise, as if he
too wanted to talk. Night set in, they quickened their pace, and the
fears of the two prisoners grew greater, especially as they heard
themselves assailed with—“Get on, ye Troglodytes;” “Silence, ye
barbarians;” “March, ye cannibals;” “No murmuring, ye Scythians;”
“Don’t open your eyes, ye murderous Polyphemes, ye blood-thirsty
lions,” and suchlike names with which their captors harassed the ears
of the wretched master and man. Sancho went along saying to himself,
“We, tortolites, barbers, animals! I don’t like those names at all;
‘it’s in a bad wind our corn is being winnowed;’ ‘misfortune comes upon
us all at once like sticks on a dog,’ and God grant it may be no worse
than them that this unlucky adventure has in store for us.”

Don Quixote rode completely dazed, unable with the aid of all his wits
to make out what could be the meaning of these abusive names they
called them, and the only conclusion he could arrive at was that there
was no good to be hoped for and much evil to be feared. And now, about
an hour after midnight, they reached a castle which Don Quixote saw at
once was the duke’s, where they had been but a short time before. “God
bless me!” said he, as he recognised the mansion, “what does this mean?
It is all courtesy and politeness in this house; but with the
vanquished good turns into evil, and evil into worse.”

They entered the chief court of the castle and found it prepared and
fitted up in a style that added to their amazement and doubled their
fears, as will be seen in the following chapter.



p68e.jpg (49K)



CHAPTER LXIX.
OF THE STRANGEST AND MOST EXTRAORDINARY ADVENTURE THAT BEFELL DON
QUIXOTE IN THE WHOLE COURSE OF THIS GREAT HISTORY




p69a.jpg (141K)

Full Size



The horsemen dismounted, and, together with the men on foot, without a
moment’s delay taking up Sancho and Don Quixote bodily, they carried
them into the court, all round which near a hundred torches fixed in
sockets were burning, besides above five hundred lamps in the
corridors, so that in spite of the night, which was somewhat dark, the
want of daylight could not be perceived. In the middle of the court was
a catafalque, raised about two yards above the ground and covered
completely by an immense canopy of black velvet, and on the steps all
round it white wax tapers burned in more than a hundred silver
candlesticks. Upon the catafalque was seen the dead body of a damsel so
lovely that by her beauty she made death itself look beautiful. She lay
with her head resting upon a cushion of brocade and crowned with a
garland of sweet-smelling flowers of divers sorts, her hands crossed
upon her bosom, and between them a branch of yellow palm of victory. On
one side of the court was erected a stage, where upon two chairs were
seated two persons who from having crowns on their 