ng that Rocinante might take fright at the sight of the
lions; he therefore sprang off his horse, flung his lance aside, braced
his buckler on his arm, and drawing his sword, advanced slowly with
marvellous intrepidity and resolute courage, to plant himself in front
of the cart, commending himself with all his heart to God and to his
lady Dulcinea.

It is to be observed, that on coming to this passage, the author of
this veracious history breaks out into exclamations. “O doughty Don
Quixote! high-mettled past extolling! Mirror, wherein all the heroes of
the world may see themselves! Second modern Don Manuel de Leon, once
the glory and honour of Spanish knighthood! In what words shall I
describe this dread exploit, by what language shall I make it credible
to ages to come, what eulogies are there unmeet for thee, though they
be hyperboles piled on hyperboles! On foot, alone, undaunted,
high-souled, with but a simple sword, and that no trenchant blade of
the Perrillo brand, a shield, but no bright polished steel one, there
stoodst thou, biding and awaiting the two fiercest lions that Africa’s
forests ever bred! Thy own deeds be thy praise, valiant Manchegan, and
here I leave them as they stand, wanting the words wherewith to glorify
them!”



p17b.jpg (352K)

Full Size



Here the author’s outburst came to an end, and he proceeded to take up
the thread of his story, saying that the keeper, seeing that Don
Quixote had taken up his position, and that it was impossible for him
to avoid letting out the male without incurring the enmity of the fiery
and daring knight, flung open the doors of the first cage, containing,
as has been said, the lion, which was now seen to be of enormous size,
and grim and hideous mien. The first thing he did was to turn round in
the cage in which he lay, and protrude his claws, and stretch himself
thoroughly; he next opened his mouth, and yawned very leisurely, and
with near two palms’ length of tongue that he had thrust forth, he
licked the dust out of his eyes and washed his face; having done this,
he put his head out of the cage and looked all round with eyes like
glowing coals, a spectacle and demeanour to strike terror into temerity
itself. Don Quixote merely observed him steadily, longing for him to
leap from the cart and come to close quarters with him, when he hoped
to hew him in pieces.

So far did his unparalleled madness go; but the noble lion, more
courteous than arrogant, not troubling himself about silly bravado,
after having looked all round, as has been said, turned about and
presented his hind-quarters to Don Quixote, and very coolly and
tranquilly lay down again in the cage. Seeing this, Don Quixote ordered
the keeper to take a stick to him and provoke him to make him come out.

“That I won’t,” said the keeper; “for if I anger him, the first he’ll
tear in pieces will be myself. Be satisfied, sir knight, with what you
have done, which leaves nothing more to be said on the score of
courage, and do not seek to tempt fortune a second time. The lion has
the door open; he is free to come out or not to come out; but as he has
not come out so far, he will not come out to-day. Your worship’s great
courage has been fully manifested already; no brave champion, so it
strikes me, is bound to do more than challenge his enemy and wait for
him on the field; if his adversary does not come, on him lies the
disgrace, and he who waits for him carries off the crown of victory.”

“That is true,” said Don Quixote; “close the door, my friend, and let
me have, in the best form thou canst, what thou hast seen me do, by way
of certificate; to wit, that thou didst open for the lion, that I
waited for him, that he did not come out, that I still waited for him,
and that still he did not come out, and lay down again. I am not bound
to do more; enchantments avaunt, and God uphold the right, the truth,
and true chivalry! Close the door as I bade the