ithful, and painstaking translator, and he has left
a version which, whatever its shortcomings may be, is singularly free
from errors and mistranslations.

The charge against it is that it is stiff, dry—“wooden” in a word,—and
no one can deny that there is a foundation for it. But it may be
pleaded for Jervas that a good deal of this rigidity is due to his
abhorrence of the light, flippant, jocose style of his predecessors. He
was one of the few, very few, translators that have shown any
apprehension of the unsmiling gravity which is the essence of Quixotic
humour; it seemed to him a crime to bring Cervantes forward smirking
and grinning at his own good things, and to this may be attributed in a
great measure the ascetic abstinence from everything savouring of
liveliness which is the characteristic of his translation. In most
modern editions, it should be observed, his style has been smoothed and
smartened, but without any reference to the original Spanish, so that
if he has been made to read more agreeably he has also been robbed of
his chief merit of fidelity.

Smollett’s version, published in 1755, may be almost counted as one of
these. At any rate it is plain that in its construction Jervas’s
translation was very freely drawn upon, and very little or probably no
heed given to the original Spanish.

The later translations may be dismissed in a few words. George Kelly’s,
which appeared in 1769, “printed for the Translator,” was an impudent
imposture, being nothing more than Motteux’s version with a few of the
words, here and there, artfully transposed; Charles Wilmot’s (1774) was
only an abridgment like Florian’s, but not so skilfully executed; and
the version published by Miss Smirke in 1818, to accompany her
brother’s plates, was merely a patchwork production made out of former
translations. On the latest, Mr. A. J. Duffield’s, it would be in every
sense of the word impertinent in me to offer an opinion here. I had not
even seen it when the present undertaking was proposed to me, and since
then I may say vidi tantum, having for obvious reasons resisted the
temptation which Mr. Duffield’s reputation and comely volumes hold out
to every lover of Cervantes.

From the foregoing history of our translations of “Don Quixote,” it
will be seen that there are a good many people who, provided they get
the mere narrative with its full complement of facts, incidents, and
adventures served up to them in a form that amuses them, care very
little whether that form is the one in which Cervantes originally
shaped his ideas. On the other hand, it is clear that there are many
who desire to have not merely the story he tells, but the story as he
tells it, so far at least as differences of idiom and circumstances
permit, and who will give a preference to the conscientious translator,
even though he may have acquitted himself somewhat awkwardly.

But after all there is no real antagonism between the two classes;
there is no reason why what pleases the one should not please the
other, or why a translator who makes it his aim to treat “Don Quixote”
with the respect due to a great classic, should not be as acceptable
even to the careless reader as the one who treats it as a famous old
jest-book. It is not a question of caviare to the general, or, if it
is, the fault rests with him who makes so. The method by which
Cervantes won the ear of the Spanish people ought, mutatis mutandis, to
be equally effective with the great majority of English readers. At any
rate, even if there are readers to whom it is a matter of indifference,
fidelity to the method is as much a part of the translator’s duty as
fidelity to the matter. If he can please all parties, so much the
better; but his first duty is to those who look to him for as faithful
a representation of his author as it is in his power to give them,
faithful to the letter so long as fidelity is practicable, faithful to
the spirit so far as h