ot been slashing some of the skins of red wine that stand full at
his bed’s head, and the spilt wine must be what this good fellow takes
for blood;” and so saying he went into the room and the rest after him,
and there they found Don Quixote in the strangest costume in the world.
He was in his shirt, which was not long enough in front to cover his
thighs completely and was six fingers shorter behind; his legs were
very long and lean, covered with hair, and anything but clean; on his
head he had a little greasy red cap that belonged to the host, round
his left arm he had rolled the blanket of the bed, to which Sancho, for
reasons best known to himself, owed a grudge, and in his right hand he
held his unsheathed sword, with which he was slashing about on all
sides, uttering exclamations as if he were actually fighting some
giant: and the best of it was his eyes were not open, for he was fast
asleep, and dreaming that he was doing battle with the giant. For his
imagination was so wrought upon by the adventure he was going to
accomplish, that it made him dream he had already reached the kingdom
of Micomicon, and was engaged in combat with his enemy; and believing
he was laying on the giant, he had given so many sword cuts to the
skins that the whole room was full of wine. On seeing this the landlord
was so enraged that he fell on Don Quixote, and with his clenched fist
began to pummel him in such a way, that if Cardenio and the curate had
not dragged him off, he would have brought the war of the giant to an
end. But in spite of all the poor gentleman never woke until the barber
brought a great pot of cold water from the well and flung it with one
dash all over his body, on which Don Quixote woke up, but not so
completely as to understand what was the matter. Dorothea, seeing how
short and slight his attire was, would not go in to witness the battle
between her champion and her opponent. As for Sancho, he went searching
all over the floor for the head of the giant, and not finding it he
said, “I see now that it’s all enchantment in this house; for the last
time, on this very spot where I am now, I got ever so many thumps
without knowing who gave them to me, or being able to see anybody; and
now this head is not to be seen anywhere about, though I saw it cut off
with my own eyes and the blood running from the body as if from a
fountain.”

“What blood and fountains are you talking about, enemy of God and his
saints?” said the landlord. “Don’t you see, you thief, that the blood
and the fountain are only these skins here that have been stabbed and
the red wine swimming all over the room?—and I wish I saw the soul of
him that stabbed them swimming in hell.”

“I know nothing about that,” said Sancho; “all I know is it will be my
bad luck that through not finding this head my county will melt away
like salt in water;”—for Sancho awake was worse than his master asleep,
so much had his master’s promises addled his wits.

The landlord was beside himself at the coolness of the squire and the
mischievous doings of the master, and swore it should not be like the
last time when they went without paying; and that their privileges of
chivalry should not hold good this time to let one or other of them off
without paying, even to the cost of the plugs that would have to be put
to the damaged wine-skins. The curate was holding Don Quixote’s hands,
who, fancying he had now ended the adventure and was in the presence of
the Princess Micomicona, knelt before the curate and said, “Exalted and
beauteous lady, your highness may live from this day forth fearless of
any harm this base being could do you; and I too from this day forth am
released from the promise I gave you, since by the help of God on high
and by the favour of her by whom I live and breathe, I have fulfilled
it so successfully.”

“Did not I say so?” said Sancho on hearing this. “You see I wasn’t
drunk; there you see my master has 