te in his trepidation began saying, “I conjure thee, phantom,
or whatever thou art, tell me what thou art and what thou wouldst with
me. If thou art a soul in torment, say so, and all that my powers can
do I will do for thee; for I am a Catholic Christian and love to do
good to all the world, and to this end I have embraced the order of
knight-errantry to which I belong, the province of which extends to
doing good even to souls in purgatory.”

The unfortunate duenna hearing herself thus conjured, by her own fear
guessed Don Quixote’s and in a low plaintive voice answered, “Señor Don
Quixote—if so be you are indeed Don Quixote—I am no phantom or spectre
or soul in purgatory, as you seem to think, but Doña Rodriguez, duenna
of honour to my lady the duchess, and I come to you with one of those
grievances your worship is wont to redress.”

“Tell me, Señora Doña Rodriguez,” said Don Quixote, “do you perchance
come to transact any go-between business? Because I must tell you I am
not available for anybody’s purpose, thanks to the peerless beauty of
my lady Dulcinea del Toboso. In short, Señora Doña Rodriguez, if you
will leave out and put aside all love messages, you may go and light
your candle and come back, and we will discuss all the commands you
have for me and whatever you wish, saving only, as I said, all
seductive communications.”

“I carry nobody’s messages, señor,” said the duenna; “little you know
me. Nay, I’m not far enough advanced in years to take to any such
childish tricks. God be praised I have a soul in my body still, and all
my teeth and grinders in my mouth, except one or two that the colds, so
common in this Aragon country, have robbed me of. But wait a little,
while I go and light my candle, and I will return immediately and lay
my sorrows before you as before one who relieves those of all the
world;” and without staying for an answer she quitted the room and left
Don Quixote tranquilly meditating while he waited for her. A thousand
thoughts at once suggested themselves to him on the subject of this new
adventure, and it struck him as being ill done and worse advised in him
to expose himself to the danger of breaking his plighted faith to his
lady; and said he to himself, “Who knows but that the devil, being wily
and cunning, may be trying now to entrap me with a duenna, having
failed with empresses, queens, duchesses, marchionesses, and
countesses? Many a time have I heard it said by many a man of sense
that he will sooner offer you a flat-nosed wench than a roman-nosed
one; and who knows but this privacy, this opportunity, this silence,
may awaken my sleeping desires, and lead me in these my latter years to
fall where I have never tripped? In cases of this sort it is better to
flee than to await the battle. But I must be out of my senses to think
and utter such nonsense; for it is impossible that a long, white-hooded
spectacled duenna could stir up or excite a wanton thought in the most
graceless bosom in the world. Is there a duenna on earth that has fair
flesh? Is there a duenna in the world that escapes being ill-tempered,
wrinkled, and prudish? Avaunt, then, ye duenna crew, undelightful to
all mankind. Oh, but that lady did well who, they say, had at the end
of her reception room a couple of figures of duennas with spectacles
and lace-cushions, as if at work, and those statues served quite as
well to give an air of propriety to the room as if they had been real
duennas.”

So saying he leaped off the bed, intending to close the door and not
allow Señora Rodriguez to enter; but as he went to shut it Señora
Rodriguez returned with a wax candle lighted, and having a closer view
of Don Quixote, with the coverlet round him, and his bandages and
night-cap, she was alarmed afresh, and retreating a couple of paces,
exclaimed, “Am I safe, sir knight? for I don’t look upon it as a sign
of very great virtue that your worship should have got up out of bed.”