nrestrainedly, feeling confident
that her mistress would screen her, and even show her how to manage it
safely. At last one night Anselmo heard footsteps in Leonela’s room,
and on trying to enter to see who it was, he found that the door was
held against him, which made him all the more determined to open it;
and exerting his strength he forced it open, and entered the room in
time to see a man leaping through the window into the street. He ran
quickly to seize him or discover who he was, but he was unable to
effect either purpose, for Leonela flung her arms round him crying, “Be
calm, señor; do not give way to passion or follow him who has escaped
from this; he belongs to me, and in fact he is my husband.”

Anselmo would not believe it, but blind with rage drew a dagger and
threatened to stab Leonela, bidding her tell the truth or he would kill
her. She, in her fear, not knowing what she was saying, exclaimed, “Do
not kill me, señor, for I can tell you things more important than any
you can imagine.”

“Tell me then at once or thou diest,” said Anselmo.

“It would be impossible for me now,” said Leonela, “I am so agitated:
leave me till to-morrow, and then you shall hear from me what will fill
you with astonishment; but rest assured that he who leaped through the
window is a young man of this city, who has given me his promise to
become my husband.”

Anselmo was appeased with this, and was content to wait the time she
asked of him, for he never expected to hear anything against Camilla,
so satisfied and sure of her virtue was he; and so he quitted the room,
and left Leonela locked in, telling her she should not come out until
she had told him all she had to make known to him. He went at once to
see Camilla, and tell her, as he did, all that had passed between him
and her handmaid, and the promise she had given him to inform him
matters of serious importance.

There is no need of saying whether Camilla was agitated or not, for so
great was her fear and dismay, that, making sure, as she had good
reason to do, that Leonela would tell Anselmo all she knew of her
faithlessness, she had not the courage to wait and see if her
suspicions were confirmed; and that same night, as soon as she thought
that Anselmo was asleep, she packed up the most valuable jewels she had
and some money, and without being observed by anybody escaped from the
house and betook herself to Lothario’s, to whom she related what had
occurred, imploring him to convey her to some place of safety or fly
with her where they might be safe from Anselmo. The state of perplexity
to which Camilla reduced Lothario was such that he was unable to utter
a word in reply, still less to decide upon what he should do. At length
he resolved to conduct her to a convent of which a sister of his was
prioress; Camilla agreed to this, and with the speed which the
circumstances demanded, Lothario took her to the convent and left her
there, and then himself quitted the city without letting anyone know of
his departure.

As soon as daylight came Anselmo, without missing Camilla from his
side, rose eager to learn what Leonela had to tell him, and hastened to
the room where he had locked her in. He opened the door, entered, but
found no Leonela; all he found was some sheets knotted to the window, a
plain proof that she had let herself down from it and escaped. He
returned, uneasy, to tell Camilla, but not finding her in bed or
anywhere in the house he was lost in amazement. He asked the servants
of the house about her, but none of them could give him any
explanation. As he was going in search of Camilla it happened by chance
that he observed her boxes were lying open, and that the greater part
of her jewels were gone; and now he became fully aware of his disgrace,
and that Leonela was not the cause of his misfortune; and, just as he
was, without delaying to dress himself completely, he repaired, sad at
heart and dejected, to 