as best he could.
They then entered the grove, and Don Quixote settled himself at the
foot of an elm, and Sancho at that of a beech, for trees of this kind
and others like them always have feet but no hands. Sancho passed the
night in pain, for with the evening dews the blow of the staff made
itself felt all the more. Don Quixote passed it in his never-failing
meditations; but, for all that, they had some winks of sleep, and with
the appearance of daylight they pursued their journey in quest of the
banks of the famous Ebro, where that befell them which will be told in
the following chapter.



p28e.jpg (36K)



CHAPTER XXIX.
OF THE FAMOUS ADVENTURE OF THE ENCHANTED BARK




p29a.jpg (127K)

Full Size



By stages as already described or left undescribed, two days after
quitting the grove Don Quixote and Sancho reached the river Ebro, and
the sight of it was a great delight to Don Quixote as he contemplated
and gazed upon the charms of its banks, the clearness of its stream,
the gentleness of its current and the abundance of its crystal waters;
and the pleasant view revived a thousand tender thoughts in his mind.
Above all, he dwelt upon what he had seen in the cave of Montesinos;
for though Master Pedro’s ape had told him that of those things part
was true, part false, he clung more to their truth than to their
falsehood, the very reverse of Sancho, who held them all to be
downright lies.

As they were thus proceeding, then, they discovered a small boat,
without oars or any other gear, that lay at the water’s edge tied to
the stem of a tree growing on the bank. Don Quixote looked all round,
and seeing nobody, at once, without more ado, dismounted from Rocinante
and bade Sancho get down from Dapple and tie both beasts securely to
the trunk of a poplar or willow that stood there. Sancho asked him the
reason of this sudden dismounting and tying. Don Quixote made answer,
“Thou must know, Sancho, that this bark is plainly, and without the
possibility of any alternative, calling and inviting me to enter it,
and in it go to give aid to some knight or other person of distinction
in need of it, who is no doubt in some sore strait; for this is the way
of the books of chivalry and of the enchanters who figure and speak in
them. When a knight is involved in some difficulty from which he cannot
be delivered save by the hand of another knight, though they may be at
a distance of two or three thousand leagues or more one from the other,
they either take him up on a cloud, or they provide a bark for him to
get into, and in less than the twinkling of an eye they carry him where
they will and where his help is required; and so, Sancho, this bark is
placed here for the same purpose; this is as true as that it is now
day, and ere this one passes tie Dapple and Rocinante together, and
then in God’s hand be it to guide us; for I would not hold back from
embarking, though barefooted friars were to beg me.”

“As that’s the case,” said Sancho, “and your worship chooses to give in
to these—I don’t know if I may call them absurdities—at every turn,
there’s nothing for it but to obey and bow the head, bearing in mind
the proverb, ‘Do as thy master bids thee, and sit down to table with
him;’ but for all that, for the sake of easing my conscience, I warn
your worship that it is my opinion this bark is no enchanted one, but
belongs to some of the fishermen of the river, for they catch the best
shad in the world here.”

As Sancho said this, he tied the beasts, leaving them to the care and
protection of the enchanters with sorrow enough in his heart. Don
Quixote bade him not be uneasy about deserting the animals, “for he who
would carry themselves over such longinquous roads and regions would
take care to feed them.”

“I don’t understand that logiquous,” said Sancho, “nor have I ever
heard the word all the days of my life.”

“Longinquous,” replied Don Quixote, “means far off; bu