o gave his master; who had, the
following day, a fresh adventure, of no less thrilling interest than
the last, with an enamoured knight-errant.



p11e.jpg (20K)



CHAPTER XII.
OF THE STRANGE ADVENTURE WHICH BEFELL THE VALIANT DON QUIXOTE WITH THE
BOLD KNIGHT OF THE MIRRORS




p12a.jpg (98K)

Full Size



The night succeeding the day of the encounter with Death, Don Quixote
and his squire passed under some tall shady trees, and Don Quixote at
Sancho’s persuasion ate a little from the store carried by Dapple, and
over their supper Sancho said to his master, “Señor, what a fool I
should have looked if I had chosen for my reward the spoils of the
first adventure your worship achieved, instead of the foals of the
three mares. After all, ‘a sparrow in the hand is better than a vulture
on the wing.’”

“At the same time, Sancho,” replied Don Quixote, “if thou hadst let me
attack them as I wanted, at the very least the emperor’s gold crown and
Cupid’s painted wings would have fallen to thee as spoils, for I should
have taken them by force and given them into thy hands.”

“The sceptres and crowns of those play-actor emperors,” said Sancho,
“were never yet pure gold, but only brass foil or tin.”

“That is true,” said Don Quixote, “for it would not be right that the
accessories of the drama should be real, instead of being mere fictions
and semblances, like the drama itself; towards which, Sancho—and, as a
necessary consequence, towards those who represent and produce it—I
would that thou wert favourably disposed, for they are all instruments
of great good to the State, placing before us at every step a mirror in
which we may see vividly displayed what goes on in human life; nor is
there any similitude that shows us more faithfully what we are and
ought to be than the play and the players. Come, tell me, hast thou not
seen a play acted in which kings, emperors, pontiffs, knights, ladies,
and divers other personages were introduced? One plays the villain,
another the knave, this one the merchant, that the soldier, one the
sharp-witted fool, another the foolish lover; and when the play is
over, and they have put off the dresses they wore in it, all the actors
become equal.”

“Yes, I have seen that,” said Sancho.

“Well then,” said Don Quixote, “the same thing happens in the comedy
and life of this world, where some play emperors, others popes, and, in
short, all the characters that can be brought into a play; but when it
is over, that is to say when life ends, death strips them all of the
garments that distinguish one from the other, and all are equal in the
grave.”

“A fine comparison!” said Sancho; “though not so new but that I have
heard it many and many a time, as well as that other one of the game of
chess; how, so long as the game lasts, each piece has its own
particular office, and when the game is finished they are all mixed,
jumbled up and shaken together, and stowed away in the bag, which is
much like ending life in the grave.”

“Thou art growing less doltish and more shrewd every day, Sancho,” said
Don Quixote.

“Ay,” said Sancho; “it must be that some of your worship’s shrewdness
sticks to me; land that, of itself, is barren and dry, will come to
yield good fruit if you dung it and till it; what I mean is that your
worship’s conversation has been the dung that has fallen on the barren
soil of my dry wit, and the time I have been in your service and
society has been the tillage; and with the help of this I hope to yield
fruit in abundance that will not fall away or slide from those paths of
good breeding that your worship has made in my parched understanding.”

Don Quixote laughed at Sancho’s affected phraseology, and perceived
that what he said about his improvement was true, for now and then he
spoke in a way that surprised him; though always, or mostly, when
Sancho tried to talk fine and attempted polite language, he wound up by
toppling