ime or death will
put an end to the wrath of her parents.”

“It comes to this, too,” said Sancho, “what some naughty people say,
‘Never ask as a favour what thou canst take by force;’ though it would
fit better to say, ‘A clear escape is better than good men’s prayers.’
I say so because if my lord the king, your worship’s father-in-law,
will not condescend to give you my lady the princess, there is nothing
for it but, as your worship says, to seize her and transport her. But
the mischief is that until peace is made and you come into the peaceful
enjoyment of your kingdom, the poor squire is famishing as far as
rewards go, unless it be that the confidante damsel that is to be his
wife comes with the princess, and that with her he tides over his bad
luck until Heaven otherwise orders things; for his master, I suppose,
may as well give her to him at once for a lawful wife.”

“Nobody can object to that,” said Don Quixote.

“Then since that may be,” said Sancho, “there is nothing for it but to
commend ourselves to God, and let fortune take what course it will.”

“God guide it according to my wishes and thy wants,” said Don Quixote,
“and mean be he who thinks himself mean.”

“In God’s name let him be so,” said Sancho: “I am an old Christian, and
to fit me for a count that’s enough.”

“And more than enough for thee,” said Don Quixote; “and even wert thou
not, it would make no difference, because I being the king can easily
give thee nobility without purchase or service rendered by thee, for
when I make thee a count, then thou art at once a gentleman; and they
may say what they will, but by my faith they will have to call thee
‘your lordship,’ whether they like it or not.”

“Not a doubt of it; and I’ll know how to support the tittle,” said
Sancho.

“Title thou shouldst say, not tittle,” said his master.

“So be it,” answered Sancho. “I say I will know how to behave, for once
in my life I was beadle of a brotherhood, and the beadle’s gown sat so
well on me that all said I looked as if I was to be steward of the same
brotherhood. What will it be, then, when I put a duke’s robe on my
back, or dress myself in gold and pearls like a count? I believe
they’ll come a hundred leagues to see me.”

“Thou wilt look well,” said Don Quixote, “but thou must shave thy beard
often, for thou hast it so thick and rough and unkempt, that if thou
dost not shave it every second day at least, they will see what thou
art at the distance of a musket shot.”

“What more will it be,” said Sancho, “than having a barber, and keeping
him at wages in the house? and even if it be necessary, I will make him
go behind me like a nobleman’s equerry.”

“Why, how dost thou know that noblemen have equerries behind them?”
asked Don Quixote.

“I will tell you,” answered Sancho. “Years ago I was for a month at the
capital and there I saw taking the air a very small gentleman who they
said was a very great man, and a man following him on horseback in
every turn he took, just as if he was his tail. I asked why this man
did not join the other man, instead of always going behind him; they
answered me that he was his equerry, and that it was the custom with
nobles to have such persons behind them, and ever since then I know it,
for I have never forgotten it.”

“Thou art right,” said Don Quixote, “and in the same way thou mayest
carry thy barber with thee, for customs did not come into use all
together, nor were they all invented at once, and thou mayest be the
first count to have a barber to follow him; and, indeed, shaving one’s
beard is a greater trust than saddling one’s horse.”

“Let the barber business be my look-out,” said Sancho; “and your
worship’s be it to strive to become a king, and make me a count.”

“So it shall be,” answered Don Quixote, and raising his eyes he saw
what will be told in the following chapter.



c20e.jpg (18K)



CHAPTER XXII.
OF THE FREEDOM DON QUIXOTE CONFERRED ON S