e
persons were that would come with him that day into the chamber where
the head was, it was an easy matter for him to answer the first
question at once and correctly; the others he answered by guess-work,
and, being clever, cleverly. Cide Hamete adds that this marvellous
contrivance stood for some ten or twelve days; but that, as it became
noised abroad through the city that he had in his house an enchanted
head that answered all who asked questions of it, Don Antonio, fearing
it might come to the ears of the watchful sentinels of our faith,
explained the matter to the inquisitors, who commanded him to break it
up and have done with it, lest the ignorant vulgar should be
scandalised. By Don Quixote, however, and by Sancho the head was still
held to be an enchanted one, and capable of answering questions, though
more to Don Quixote’s satisfaction than Sancho’s.

The gentlemen of the city, to gratify Don Antonio and also to do the
honours to Don Quixote, and give him an opportunity of displaying his
folly, made arrangements for a tilting at the ring in six days from
that time, which, however, for reason that will be mentioned hereafter,
did not take place.

Don Quixote took a fancy to stroll about the city quietly and on foot,
for he feared that if he went on horseback the boys would follow him;
so he and Sancho and two servants that Don Antonio gave him set out for
a walk. Thus it came to pass that going along one of the streets Don
Quixote lifted up his eyes and saw written in very large letters over a
door, “Books printed here,” at which he was vastly pleased, for until
then he had never seen a printing office, and he was curious to know
what it was like. He entered with all his following, and saw them
drawing sheets in one place, correcting in another, setting up type
here, revising there; in short all the work that is to be seen in great
printing offices. He went up to one case and asked what they were about
there; the workmen told him, he watched them with wonder, and passed
on. He approached one man, among others, and asked him what he was
doing. The workman replied, “Señor, this gentleman here” (pointing to a
man of prepossessing appearance and a certain gravity of look) “has
translated an Italian book into our Spanish tongue, and I am setting it
up in type for the press.”

“What is the title of the book?” asked Don Quixote; to which the author
replied, “Señor, in Italian the book is called _Le Bagatelle_.”

“And what does _Le Bagatelle_ import in our Spanish?” asked Don
Quixote.

“_Le Bagatelle_,” said the author, “is as though we should say in
Spanish _Los Juguetes;_ but though the book is humble in name it has
good solid matter in it.”

“I,” said Don Quixote, “have some little smattering of Italian, and I
plume myself on singing some of Ariosto’s stanzas; but tell me, señor—I
do not say this to test your ability, but merely out of curiosity—have
you ever met with the word _pignatta_ in your book?”

“Yes, often,” said the author.

“And how do you render that in Spanish?”

“How should I render it,” returned the author, “but by _olla_?”

“Body o’ me,” exclaimed Don Quixote, “what a proficient you are in the
Italian language! I would lay a good wager that where they say in
Italian _piace_ you say in Spanish _place_, and where they say _piu_
you say _mas_, and you translate _sù_ by _arriba_ and _giù_ by
_abajo_.”

“I translate them so of course,” said the author, “for those are their
proper equivalents.”

“I would venture to swear,” said Don Quixote, “that your worship is not
known in the world, which always begrudges their reward to rare wits
and praiseworthy labours. What talents lie wasted there! What genius
thrust away into corners! What worth left neglected! Still it seems to
me that translation from one language into another, if it be not from
the queens of languages, the Greek and the Latin, is like looking at
Flemish tapestries on the wrong