her heir, and because he
deserves it, as you will perceive when you see him. And moreover, I can
tell you, all that he sings is out of his own head; for I have heard
them say he is a great scholar and poet; and what is more, every time I
see him or hear him sing I tremble all over, and am terrified lest my
father should recognise him and come to know of our loves. I have never
spoken a word to him in my life; and for all that I love him so that I
could not live without him. This, dear señora, is all I have to tell
you about the musician whose voice has delighted you so much; and from
it alone you might easily perceive he is no muleteer, but a lord of
hearts and towns, as I told you already.”

“Say no more, Doña Clara,” said Dorothea at this, at the same time
kissing her a thousand times over, “say no more, I tell you, but wait
till day comes; when I trust in God to arrange this affair of yours so
that it may have the happy ending such an innocent beginning deserves.”

“Ah, señora,” said Doña Clara, “what end can be hoped for when his
father is of such lofty position, and so wealthy, that he would think I
was not fit to be even a servant to his son, much less wife? And as to
marrying without the knowledge of my father, I would not do it for all
the world. I would not ask anything more than that this youth should go
back and leave me; perhaps with not seeing him, and the long distance
we shall have to travel, the pain I suffer now may become easier;
though I daresay the remedy I propose will do me very little good. I
don’t know how the devil this has come about, or how this love I have
for him got in; I such a young girl, and he such a mere boy; for I
verily believe we are both of an age, and I am not sixteen yet; for I
will be sixteen Michaelmas Day, next, my father says.”

Dorothea could not help laughing to hear how like a child Doña Clara
spoke. “Let us go to sleep now, señora,” said she, “for the little of
the night that I fancy is left to us: God will soon send us daylight,
and we will set all to rights, or it will go hard with me.”

With this they fell asleep, and deep silence reigned all through the
inn. The only persons not asleep were the landlady’s daughter and her
servant Maritornes, who, knowing the weak point of Don Quixote’s
humour, and that he was outside the inn mounting guard in armour and on
horseback, resolved, the pair of them, to play some trick upon him, or
at any rate to amuse themselves for a while by listening to his
nonsense. As it so happened there was not a window in the whole inn
that looked outwards except a hole in the wall of a straw-loft through
which they used to throw out the straw. At this hole the two
demi-damsels posted themselves, and observed Don Quixote on his horse,
leaning on his pike and from time to time sending forth such deep and
doleful sighs, that he seemed to pluck up his soul by the roots with
each of them; and they could hear him, too, saying in a soft, tender,
loving tone, “Oh my lady Dulcinea del Toboso, perfection of all beauty,
summit and crown of discretion, treasure house of grace, depositary of
virtue, and finally, ideal of all that is good, honourable, and
delectable in this world! What is thy grace doing now? Art thou,
perchance, mindful of thy enslaved knight who of his own free will hath
exposed himself to so great perils, and all to serve thee? Give me
tidings of her, oh luminary of the three faces! Perhaps at this moment,
envious of hers, thou art regarding her, either as she paces to and fro
some gallery of her sumptuous palaces, or leans over some balcony,
meditating how, whilst preserving her purity and greatness, she may
mitigate the tortures this wretched heart of mine endures for her sake,
what glory should recompense my sufferings, what repose my toil, and
lastly what death my life, and what reward my services? And thou, oh
sun, that art now doubtless harnessing thy steeds in haste to rise
betime