oraida and I were left alone, with nothing more than the crowns
which the courtesy of the Frenchman had bestowed upon Zoraida, out of
which I bought the beast on which she rides; and, I for the present
attending her as her father and squire and not as her husband, we are
now going to ascertain if my father is living, or if any of my brothers
has had better fortune than mine has been; though, as Heaven has made
me the companion of Zoraida, I think no other lot could be assigned to
me, however happy, that I would rather have. The patience with which
she endures the hardships that poverty brings with it, and the
eagerness she shows to become a Christian, are such that they fill me
with admiration, and bind me to serve her all my life; though the
happiness I feel in seeing myself hers, and her mine, is disturbed and
marred by not knowing whether I shall find any corner to shelter her in
my own country, or whether time and death may not have made such
changes in the fortunes and lives of my father and brothers, that I
shall hardly find anyone who knows me, if they are not alive.

I have no more of my story to tell you, gentlemen; whether it be an
interesting or a curious one let your better judgments decide; all I
can say is I would gladly have told it to you more briefly; although my
fear of wearying you has made me leave out more than one circumstance.



c41g.jpg (33K)



CHAPTER XLII.
WHICH TREATS OF WHAT FURTHER TOOK PLACE IN THE INN, AND OF SEVERAL
OTHER THINGS WORTH KNOWING




c42a.jpg (139K)

Full Size




With these words the captive held his peace, and Don Fernando said to
him, “In truth, captain, the manner in which you have related this
remarkable adventure has been such as befitted the novelty and
strangeness of the matter. The whole story is curious and uncommon, and
abounds with incidents that fill the hearers with wonder and
astonishment; and so great is the pleasure we have found in listening
to it that we should be glad if it were to begin again, even though
to-morrow were to find us still occupied with the same tale.” And while
he said this Cardenio and the rest of them offered to be of service to
him in any way that lay in their power, and in words and language so
kindly and sincere that the captain was much gratified by their
good-will. In particular Don Fernando offered, if he would go back with
him, to get his brother the marquis to become godfather at the baptism
of Zoraida, and on his own part to provide him with the means of making
his appearance in his own country with the credit and comfort he was
entitled to. For all this the captive returned thanks very courteously,
although he would not accept any of their generous offers.

By this time night closed in, and as it did, there came up to the inn a
coach attended by some men on horseback, who demanded accommodation; to
which the landlady replied that there was not a hand’s breadth of the
whole inn unoccupied.

“Still, for all that,” said one of those who had entered on horseback,
“room must be found for his lordship the Judge here.”

At this name the landlady was taken aback, and said, “Señor, the fact
is I have no beds; but if his lordship the Judge carries one with him,
as no doubt he does, let him come in and welcome; for my husband and I
will give up our room to accommodate his worship.”

“Very good, so be it,” said the squire; but in the meantime a man had
got out of the coach whose dress indicated at a glance the office and
post he held, for the long robe with ruffled sleeves that he wore
showed that he was, as his servant said, a Judge of appeal. He led by
the hand a young girl in a travelling dress, apparently about sixteen
years of age, and of such a high-bred air, so beautiful and so
graceful, that all were filled with admiration when she made her
appearance, and but for having seen Dorothea, Luscinda, and Zoraida,
who were there in the inn, they would have fancied