the virtue, wealth, and generosity of their
possessors. I have said virtue, wealth, and generosity, because a great
man who is vicious will be a great example of vice, and a rich man who
is not generous will be merely a miserly beggar; for the possessor of
wealth is not made happy by possessing it, but by spending it, and not
by spending as he pleases, but by knowing how to spend it well. The
poor gentleman has no way of showing that he is a gentleman but by
virtue, by being affable, well-bred, courteous, gentle-mannered, and
kindly, not haughty, arrogant, or censorious, but above all by being
charitable; for by two maravedis given with a cheerful heart to the
poor, he will show himself as generous as he who distributes alms with
bell-ringing, and no one that perceives him to be endowed with the
virtues I have named, even though he know him not, will fail to
recognise and set him down as one of good blood; and it would be
strange were it not so; praise has ever been the reward of virtue, and
those who are virtuous cannot fail to receive commendation. There are
two roads, my daughters, by which men may reach wealth and honours; one
is that of letters, the other that of arms. I have more of arms than of
letters in my composition, and, judging by my inclination to arms, was
born under the influence of the planet Mars. I am, therefore, in a
measure constrained to follow that road, and by it I must travel in
spite of all the world, and it will be labour in vain for you to urge
me to resist what heaven wills, fate ordains, reason requires, and,
above all, my own inclination favours; for knowing as I do the
countless toils that are the accompaniments of knight-errantry, I know,
too, the infinite blessings that are attained by it; I know that the
path of virtue is very narrow, and the road of vice broad and spacious;
I know their ends and goals are different, for the broad and easy road
of vice ends in death, and the narrow and toilsome one of virtue in
life, and not transitory life, but in that which has no end; I know, as
our great Castilian poet says, that-

It is by rugged paths like these they go
That scale the heights of immortality,
Unreached by those that falter here below.”


“Woe is me!” exclaimed the niece, “my lord is a poet, too! He knows
everything, and he can do everything; I will bet, if he chose to turn
mason, he could make a house as easily as a cage.”

“I can tell you, niece,” replied Don Quixote, “if these chivalrous
thoughts did not engage all my faculties, there would be nothing that I
could not do, nor any sort of knickknack that would not come from my
hands, particularly cages and tooth-picks.”

At this moment there came a knocking at the door, and when they asked
who was there, Sancho Panza made answer that it was he. The instant the
housekeeper knew who it was, she ran to hide herself so as not to see
him; in such abhorrence did she hold him. The niece let him in, and his
master Don Quixote came forward to receive him with open arms, and the
pair shut themselves up in his room, where they had another
conversation not inferior to the previous one.



p06e.jpg (19K)



CHAPTER VII.
OF WHAT PASSED BETWEEN DON QUIXOTE AND HIS SQUIRE, TOGETHER WITH OTHER
VERY NOTABLE INCIDENTS




p07a.jpg (140K)

Full Size



The instant the housekeeper saw Sancho Panza shut himself in with her
master, she guessed what they were about; and suspecting that the
result of the consultation would be a resolve to undertake a third
sally, she seized her mantle, and in deep anxiety and distress, ran to
find the bachelor Samson Carrasco, as she thought that, being a
well-spoken man, and a new friend of her master’s, he might be able to
persuade him to give up any such crazy notion. She found him pacing the
patio of his house, and, perspiring and flurried, she fell at his feet
the moment she saw him.

Carrasco, seeing how distressed and overcome she was, sai