ragged through the
streets, nor exposed either at the corners of the market-places, or in
the closets of palaces. She is the product of an Alchemy of such virtue
that he who is able to practise it, will turn her into pure gold of
inestimable worth. He that possesses her must keep her within bounds,
not permitting her to break out in ribald satires or soulless sonnets.
She must on no account be offered for sale, unless, indeed, it be in
heroic poems, moving tragedies, or sprightly and ingenious comedies.
She must not be touched by the buffoons, nor by the ignorant vulgar,
incapable of comprehending or appreciating her hidden treasures. And do
not suppose, señor, that I apply the term vulgar here merely to
plebeians and the lower orders; for everyone who is ignorant, be he
lord or prince, may and should be included among the vulgar. He, then,
who shall embrace and cultivate poetry under the conditions I have
named, shall become famous, and his name honoured throughout all the
civilised nations of the earth. And with regard to what you say, señor,
of your son having no great opinion of Spanish poetry, I am inclined to
think that he is not quite right there, and for this reason: the great
poet Homer did not write in Latin, because he was a Greek, nor did
Virgil write in Greek, because he was a Latin; in short, all the
ancient poets wrote in the language they imbibed with their mother’s
milk, and never went in quest of foreign ones to express their sublime
conceptions; and that being so, the usage should in justice extend to
all nations, and the German poet should not be undervalued because he
writes in his own language, nor the Castilian, nor even the Biscayan,
for writing in his. But your son, señor, I suspect, is not prejudiced
against Spanish poetry, but against those poets who are mere Spanish
verse writers, without any knowledge of other languages or sciences to
adorn and give life and vigour to their natural inspiration; and yet
even in this he may be wrong; for, according to a true belief, a poet
is born one; that is to say, the poet by nature comes forth a poet from
his mother’s womb; and following the bent that heaven has bestowed upon
him, without the aid of study or art, he produces things that show how
truly he spoke who said, ‘_Est Deus in nobis_,’ etc. At the same time,
I say that the poet by nature who calls in art to his aid will be a far
better poet, and will surpass him who tries to be one relying upon his
knowledge of art alone. The reason is, that art does not surpass
nature, but only brings it to perfection; and thus, nature combined
with art, and art with nature, will produce a perfect poet. To bring my
argument to a close, I would say then, gentle sir, let your son go on
as his star leads him, for being so studious as he seems to be, and
having already successfully surmounted the first step of the sciences,
which is that of the languages, with their help he will by his own
exertions reach the summit of polite literature, which so well becomes
an independent gentleman, and adorns, honours, and distinguishes him,
as much as the mitre does the bishop, or the gown the learned
counsellor. If your son write satires reflecting on the honour of
others, chide and correct him, and tear them up; but if he compose
discourses in which he rebukes vice in general, in the style of Horace,
and with elegance like his, commend him; for it is legitimate for a
poet to write against envy and lash the envious in his verse, and the
other vices too, provided he does not single out individuals; there
are, however, poets who, for the sake of saying something spiteful,
would run the risk of being banished to the coast of Pontus. If the
poet be pure in his morals, he will be pure in his verses too; the pen
is the tongue of the mind, and as the thought engendered there, so will
be the things that it writes down. And when kings and princes observe
this marvellous science of poetry i