r, as well as that of the street she lived in, they
omit to mention. The sole foundation for all this is that in 1605 there
certainly was living in the family of Cervantes a Doña Isabel de
Saavedra, who is described in an official document as his natural
daughter, and then twenty years of age.

With his crippled left hand promotion in the army was hopeless, now
that Don John was dead and he had no one to press his claims and
services, and for a man drawing on to forty life in the ranks was a
dismal prospect; he had already a certain reputation as a poet; he made
up his mind, therefore, to cast his lot with literature, and for a
first venture committed his “Galatea” to the press. It was published,
as Salva y Mallen shows conclusively, at Alcalá, his own birth-place,
in 1585 and no doubt helped to make his name more widely known, but
certainly did not do him much good in any other way.

While it was going through the press, he married Doña Catalina de
Palacios Salazar y Vozmediano, a lady of Esquivias near Madrid, and
apparently a friend of the family, who brought him a fortune which may
possibly have served to keep the wolf from the door, but if so, that
was all. The drama had by this time outgrown market-place stages and
strolling companies, and with his old love for it he naturally turned
to it for a congenial employment. In about three years he wrote twenty
or thirty plays, which he tells us were performed without any throwing
of cucumbers or other missiles, and ran their course without any
hisses, outcries, or disturbance. In other words, his plays were not
bad enough to be hissed off the stage, but not good enough to hold
their own upon it. Only two of them have been preserved, but as they
happen to be two of the seven or eight he mentions with complacency, we
may assume they are favourable specimens, and no one who reads the
“Numancia” and the “Trato de Argel” will feel any surprise that they
failed as acting dramas. Whatever merits they may have, whatever
occasional they may show, they are, as regards construction, incurably
clumsy. How completely they failed is manifest from the fact that with
all his sanguine temperament and indomitable perseverance he was unable
to maintain the struggle to gain a livelihood as a dramatist for more
than three years; nor was the rising popularity of Lope the cause, as
is often said, notwithstanding his own words to the contrary. When Lope
began to write for the stage is uncertain, but it was certainly after
Cervantes went to Seville.

Among the “Nuevos Documentos” printed by Señor Asensio y Toledo is one
dated 1592, and curiously characteristic of Cervantes. It is an
agreement with one Rodrigo Osorio, a manager, who was to accept six
comedies at fifty ducats (about 6l.) apiece, not to be paid in any case
unless it appeared on representation that the said comedy was one of
the best that had ever been represented in Spain. The test does not
seem to have been ever applied; perhaps it was sufficiently apparent to
Rodrigo Osorio that the comedies were not among the best that had ever
been represented. Among the correspondence of Cervantes there might
have been found, no doubt, more than one letter like that we see in the
“Rake’s Progress,” “Sir, I have read your play, and it will not doo.”

He was more successful in a literary contest at Saragossa in 1595 in
honour of the canonisation of St. Jacinto, when his composition won the
first prize, three silver spoons. The year before this he had been
appointed a collector of revenues for the kingdom of Granada. In order
to remit the money he had collected more conveniently to the treasury,
he entrusted it to a merchant, who failed and absconded; and as the
bankrupt’s assets were insufficient to cover the whole, he was sent to
prison at Seville in September 1597. The balance against him, however,
was a small one, about 26l., and on giving security for it he was
released at the end of the