
defiance.”

Don Quixote, bruised and stupefied, without raising his visor said in a
weak feeble voice as if he were speaking out of a tomb, “Dulcinea del
Toboso is the fairest woman in the world, and I the most unfortunate
knight on earth; it is not fitting that this truth should suffer by my
feebleness; drive your lance home, sir knight, and take my life, since
you have taken away my honour.”

“That will I not, in sooth,” said he of the White Moon; “live the fame
of the lady Dulcinea’s beauty undimmed as ever; all I require is that
the great Don Quixote retire to his own home for a year, or for so long
a time as shall by me be enjoined upon him, as we agreed before
engaging in this combat.”

The viceroy, Don Antonio, and several others who were present heard all
this, and heard too how Don Quixote replied that so long as nothing in
prejudice of Dulcinea was demanded of him, he would observe all the
rest like a true and loyal knight. The engagement given, he of the
White Moon wheeled about, and making obeisance to the viceroy with a
movement of the head, rode away into the city at a half gallop. The
viceroy bade Don Antonio hasten after him, and by some means or other
find out who he was. They raised Don Quixote up and uncovered his face,
and found him pale and bathed with sweat.



p64b.jpg (344K)

Full Size



Rocinante from the mere hard measure he had received lay unable to stir
for the present. Sancho, wholly dejected and woebegone, knew not what
to say or do. He fancied that all was a dream, that the whole business
was a piece of enchantment. Here was his master defeated, and bound not
to take up arms for a year. He saw the light of the glory of his
achievements obscured; the hopes of the promises lately made him swept
away like smoke before the wind; Rocinante, he feared, was crippled for
life, and his master’s bones out of joint; for if he were only shaken
out of his madness it would be no small luck. In the end they carried
him into the city in a hand-chair which the viceroy sent for, and
thither the viceroy himself returned, eager to ascertain who this
Knight of the White Moon was who had left Don Quixote in such a sad
plight.



p64e.jpg (44K)

Full Size



CHAPTER LXV.
WHEREIN IS MADE KNOWN WHO THE KNIGHT OF THE WHITE MOON WAS; LIKEWISE
DON GREGORIO’S RELEASE, AND OTHER EVENTS




p65a.jpg (149K)

Full Size



Don Antonio Moreno followed the Knight of the White Moon, and a number
of boys followed him too, nay pursued him, until they had him fairly
housed in a hostel in the heart of the city. Don Antonio, eager to make
his acquaintance, entered also; a squire came out to meet him and
remove his armour, and he shut himself into a lower room, still
attended by Don Antonio, whose bread would not bake until he had found
out who he was. He of the White Moon, seeing then that the gentleman
would not leave him, said, “I know very well, señor, what you have come
for; it is to find out who I am; and as there is no reason why I should
conceal it from you, while my servant here is taking off my armour I
will tell you the true state of the case, without leaving out anything.
You must know, señor, that I am called the bachelor Samson Carrasco. I
am of the same village as Don Quixote of La Mancha, whose craze and
folly make all of us who know him feel pity for him, and I am one of
those who have felt it most; and persuaded that his chance of recovery
lay in quiet and keeping at home and in his own house, I hit upon a
device for keeping him there. Three months ago, therefore, I went out
to meet him as a knight-errant, under the assumed name of the Knight of
the Mirrors, intending to engage him in combat and overcome him without
hurting him, making it the condition of our combat that the vanquished
should be at the disposal of the victor. What I meant to demand of him
(for I regarded him as vanquished already) was that he should return to
hi