d reading it aloud that Sancho
might hear it, he found that it ran as follows:

SONNET

Or Love is lacking in intelligence,
Or to the height of cruelty attains,
Or else it is my doom to suffer pains
Beyond the measure due to my offence.
But if Love be a God, it follows thence
That he knows all, and certain it remains
No God loves cruelty; then who ordains
This penance that enthrals while it torments?
It were a falsehood, Chloe, thee to name;
Such evil with such goodness cannot live;
And against Heaven I dare not charge the blame,
I only know it is my fate to die.
To him who knows not whence his malady
A miracle alone a cure can give.




c23f.jpg (344K)

Full Size




“There is nothing to be learned from that rhyme,” said Sancho, “unless
by that clue there’s in it, one may draw out the ball of the whole
matter.”

“What clue is there?” said Don Quixote.

“I thought your worship spoke of a clue in it,” said Sancho.

“I only said Chloe,” replied Don Quixote; “and that no doubt, is the
name of the lady of whom the author of the sonnet complains; and,
faith, he must be a tolerable poet, or I know little of the craft.”

“Then your worship understands rhyming too?”

“And better than thou thinkest,” replied Don Quixote, “as thou shalt
see when thou carriest a letter written in verse from beginning to end
to my lady Dulcinea del Toboso, for I would have thee know, Sancho,
that all or most of the knights-errant in days of yore were great
troubadours and great musicians, for both of these accomplishments, or
more properly speaking gifts, are the peculiar property of
lovers-errant: true it is that the verses of the knights of old have
more spirit than neatness in them.”

“Read more, your worship,” said Sancho, “and you will find something
that will enlighten us.”

Don Quixote turned the page and said, “This is prose and seems to be a
letter.”

“A correspondence letter, señor?”

“From the beginning it seems to be a love letter,” replied Don Quixote.

“Then let your worship read it aloud,” said Sancho, “for I am very fond
of love matters.”

“With all my heart,” said Don Quixote, and reading it aloud as Sancho
had requested him, he found it ran thus:

Thy false promise and my sure misfortune carry me to a place whence the
news of my death will reach thy ears before the words of my complaint.
Ungrateful one, thou hast rejected me for one more wealthy, but not
more worthy; but if virtue were esteemed wealth I should neither envy
the fortunes of others nor weep for misfortunes of my own. What thy
beauty raised up thy deeds have laid low; by it I believed thee to be
an angel, by them I know thou art a woman. Peace be with thee who hast
sent war to me, and Heaven grant that the deceit of thy husband be ever
hidden from thee, so that thou repent not of what thou hast done, and I
reap not a revenge I would not have.


When he had finished the letter, Don Quixote said, “There is less to be
gathered from this than from the verses, except that he who wrote it is
some rejected lover;” and turning over nearly all the pages of the book
he found more verses and letters, some of which he could read, while
others he could not; but they were all made up of complaints, laments,
misgivings, desires and aversions, favours and rejections, some
rapturous, some doleful. While Don Quixote examined the book, Sancho
examined the valise, not leaving a corner in the whole of it or in the
pad that he did not search, peer into, and explore, or seam that he did
not rip, or tuft of wool that he did not pick to pieces, lest anything
should escape for want of care and pains; so keen was the covetousness
excited in him by the discovery of the crowns, which amounted to near a
hundred; and though he found no more booty, he held the blanket
flights, balsam vomits, stake benedictions, carriers’ fisticuffs,
missing alforjas, stolen coat, and all the hunger, thirst, and
weariness he had 