f the truth; so from that time forward
our sole occupation was watching and gazing at the window where the
cross had appeared to us, as if it were our pole-star; but at least
fifteen days passed without our seeing either it or the hand, or any
other sign and though meanwhile we endeavoured with the utmost pains to
ascertain who it was that lived in the house, and whether there were
any Christian renegade in it, nobody could ever tell us anything more
than that he who lived there was a rich Moor of high position, Hadji
Morato by name, formerly alcaide of La Pata, an office of high dignity
among them. But when we least thought it was going to rain any more
cianis from that quarter, we saw the reed suddenly appear with another
cloth tied in a larger knot attached to it, and this at a time when, as
on the former occasion, the baño was deserted and unoccupied.



c40b.jpg (288K)

Full Size




We made trial as before, each of the same three going forward before I
did; but the reed was delivered to none but me, and on my approach it
was let drop. I untied the knot and I found forty Spanish gold crowns
with a paper written in Arabic, and at the end of the writing there was
a large cross drawn. I kissed the cross, took the crowns and returned
to the terrace, and we all made our salaams; again the hand appeared, I
made signs that I would read the paper, and then the window was closed.
We were all puzzled, though filled with joy at what had taken place;
and as none of us understood Arabic, great was our curiosity to know
what the paper contained, and still greater the difficulty of finding
someone to read it. At last I resolved to confide in a renegade, a
native of Murcia, who professed a very great friendship for me, and had
given pledges that bound him to keep any secret I might entrust to him;
for it is the custom with some renegades, when they intend to return to
Christian territory, to carry about them certificates from captives of
mark testifying, in whatever form they can, that such and such a
renegade is a worthy man who has always shown kindness to Christians,
and is anxious to escape on the first opportunity that may present
itself. Some obtain these testimonials with good intentions, others put
them to a cunning use; for when they go to pillage on Christian
territory, if they chance to be cast away, or taken prisoners, they
produce their certificates and say that from these papers may be seen
the object they came for, which was to remain on Christian ground, and
that it was to this end they joined the Turks in their foray. In this
way they escape the consequences of the first outburst and make their
peace with the Church before it does them any harm, and then when they
have the chance they return to Barbary to become what they were before.
Others, however, there are who procure these papers and make use of
them honestly, and remain on Christian soil. This friend of mine, then,
was one of these renegades that I have described; he had certificates
from all our comrades, in which we testified in his favour as strongly
as we could; and if the Moors had found the papers they would have
burned him alive.

I knew that he understood Arabic very well, and could not only speak
but also write it; but before I disclosed the whole matter to him, I
asked him to read for me this paper which I had found by accident in a
hole in my cell. He opened it and remained some time examining it and
muttering to himself as he translated it. I asked him if he understood
it, and he told me he did perfectly well, and that if I wished him to
tell me its meaning word for word, I must give him pen and ink that he
might do it more satisfactorily. We at once gave him what he required,
and he set about translating it bit by bit, and when he had done he
said:

“All that is here in Spanish is what the Moorish paper contains, and
you must bear in mind that when it says ‘Lela Marien’ it means ‘Our