ictor or vanquished. Altisidora, come back
from death to life as Don Quixote fancied, following up the freak of
her lord and lady, entered the chamber, crowned with the garland she
had worn on the catafalque and in a robe of white taffeta embroidered
with gold flowers, her hair flowing loose over her shoulders, and
leaning upon a staff of fine black ebony. Don Quixote, disconcerted and
in confusion at her appearance, huddled himself up and well-nigh
covered himself altogether with the sheets and counterpane of the bed,
tongue-tied, and unable to offer her any civility. Altisidora seated
herself on a chair at the head of the bed, and, after a deep sigh, said
to him in a feeble, soft voice, “When women of rank and modest maidens
trample honour under foot, and give a loose to the tongue that breaks
through every impediment, publishing abroad the inmost secrets of their
hearts, they are reduced to sore extremities. Such a one am I, Señor
Don Quixote of La Mancha, crushed, conquered, love-smitten, but yet
patient under suffering and virtuous, and so much so that my heart
broke with grief and I lost my life. For the last two days I have been
dead, slain by the thought of the cruelty with which thou hast treated
me, obdurate knight,

O harder thou than marble to my plaint;


or at least believed to be dead by all who saw me; and had it not been
that Love, taking pity on me, let my recovery rest upon the sufferings
of this good squire, there I should have remained in the other world.”

“Love might very well have let it rest upon the sufferings of my ass,
and I should have been obliged to him,” said Sancho. “But tell me,
señora—and may heaven send you a tenderer lover than my master—what did
you see in the other world? What goes on in hell? For of course that’s
where one who dies in despair is bound for.”

“To tell you the truth,” said Altisidora, “I cannot have died outright,
for I did not go into hell; had I gone in, it is very certain I should
never have come out again, do what I might. The truth is, I came to the
gate, where some dozen or so of devils were playing tennis, all in
breeches and doublets, with falling collars trimmed with Flemish
bonelace, and ruffles of the same that served them for wristbands, with
four fingers’ breadth of the arms exposed to make their hands look
longer; in their hands they held rackets of fire; but what amazed me
still more was that books, apparently full of wind and rubbish, served
them for tennis balls, a strange and marvellous thing; this, however,
did not astonish me so much as to observe that, although with players
it is usual for the winners to be glad and the losers sorry, there in
that game all were growling, all were snarling, and all were cursing
one another.” “That’s no wonder,” said Sancho; “for devils, whether
playing or not, can never be content, win or lose.”

“Very likely,” said Altisidora; “but there is another thing that
surprises me too, I mean surprised me then, and that was that no ball
outlasted the first throw or was of any use a second time; and it was
wonderful the constant succession there was of books, new and old. To
one of them, a brand-new, well-bound one, they gave such a stroke that
they knocked the guts out of it and scattered the leaves about. ‘Look
what book that is,’ said one devil to another, and the other replied,
‘It is the “Second Part of the History of Don Quixote of La Mancha,”
not by Cide Hamete, the original author, but by an Aragonese who by his
own account is of Tordesillas.’ ‘Out of this with it,’ said the first,
‘and into the depths of hell with it out of my sight.’ ‘Is it so bad?’
said the other. ‘So bad is it,’ said the first, ‘that if I had set
myself deliberately to make a worse, I could not have done it.’ They
then went on with their game, knocking other books about; and I, having
heard them mention the name of Don Quixote whom I love and adore so,
took care to retain this vision in 