shed to avoid the imputation of tameness and commonplace, to declare
himself the slave of her will, which the next was compelled to cap by
some still stronger declaration; and so expressions of devotion went on
rising one above the other like biddings at an auction, and a
conventional language of gallantry and theory of love came into being
that in time permeated the literature of Southern Europe, and bore
fruit, in one direction in the transcendental worship of Beatrice and
Laura, and in another in the grotesque idolatry which found exponents
in writers like Feliciano de Silva. This is what Cervantes deals with
in Don Quixote’s passion for Dulcinea, and in no instance has he
carried out the burlesque more happily. By keeping Dulcinea in the
background, and making her a vague shadowy being of whose very
existence we are left in doubt, he invests Don Quixote’s worship of her
virtues and charms with an additional extravagance, and gives still
more point to the caricature of the sentiment and language of the
romances.

One of the great merits of “Don Quixote,” and one of the qualities that
have secured its acceptance by all classes of readers and made it the
most cosmopolitan of books, is its simplicity. There are, of course,
points obvious enough to a Spanish seventeenth century audience which
do not immediately strike a reader now-a-days, and Cervantes often
takes it for granted that an allusion will be generally understood
which is only intelligible to a few. For example, on many of his
readers in Spain, and most of his readers out of it, the significance
of his choice of a country for his hero is completely lost. It would be
going too far to say that no one can thoroughly comprehend “Don
Quixote” without having seen La Mancha, but undoubtedly even a glimpse
of La Mancha will give an insight into the meaning of Cervantes such as
no commentator can give. Of all the regions of Spain it is the last
that would suggest the idea of romance. Of all the dull central plateau
of the Peninsula it is the dullest tract. There is something impressive
about the grim solitudes of Estremadura; and if the plains of Leon and
Old Castile are bald and dreary, they are studded with old cities
renowned in history and rich in relics of the past. But there is no
redeeming feature in the Manchegan landscape; it has all the sameness
of the desert without its dignity; the few towns and villages that
break its monotony are mean and commonplace, there is nothing venerable
about them, they have not even the picturesqueness of poverty; indeed,
Don Quixote’s own village, Argamasilla, has a sort of oppressive
respectability in the prim regularity of its streets and houses;
everything is ignoble; the very windmills are the ugliest and shabbiest
of the windmill kind.

To anyone who knew the country well, the mere style and title of “Don
Quixote of La Mancha” gave the key to the author’s meaning at once. La
Mancha as the knight’s country and scene of his chivalries is of a
piece with the pasteboard helmet, the farm-labourer on ass-back for a
squire, knighthood conferred by a rascally ventero, convicts taken for
victims of oppression, and the rest of the incongruities between Don
Quixote’s world and the world he lived in, between things as he saw
them and things as they were.

It is strange that this element of incongruity, underlying the whole
humour and purpose of the book, should have been so little heeded by
the majority of those who have undertaken to interpret “Don Quixote.”
It has been completely overlooked, for example, by the illustrators. To
be sure, the great majority of the artists who illustrated “Don
Quixote” knew nothing whatever of Spain. To them a venta conveyed no
idea but the abstract one of a roadside inn, and they could not
therefore do full justice to the humour of Don Quixote’s misconception
in taking it for a castle, or perceive the remoteness of all its
realities from his ideal.