I not what I am it
would terrify me too; so, come, I will help thee up where thou wilt.”

While Don Quixote waited for Sancho to mount into the cork tree he of
the Mirrors took as much ground as he considered requisite, and,
supposing Don Quixote to have done the same, without waiting for any
sound of trumpet or other signal to direct them, he wheeled his horse,
which was not more agile or better-looking than Rocinante, and at his
top speed, which was an easy trot, he proceeded to charge his enemy;
seeing him, however, engaged in putting Sancho up, he drew rein, and
halted in mid career, for which his horse was very grateful, as he was
already unable to go. Don Quixote, fancying that his foe was coming
down upon him flying, drove his spurs vigorously into Rocinante’s lean
flanks and made him scud along in such style that the history tells us
that on this occasion only was he known to make something like running,
for on all others it was a simple trot with him; and with this
unparalleled fury he bore down where he of the Mirrors stood digging
his spurs into his horse up to buttons, without being able to make him
stir a finger’s length from the spot where he had come to a standstill
in his course. At this lucky moment and crisis, Don Quixote came upon
his adversary, in trouble with his horse, and embarrassed with his
lance, which he either could not manage, or had no time to lay in rest.
Don Quixote, however, paid no attention to these difficulties, and in
perfect safety to himself and without any risk encountered him of the
Mirrors with such force that he brought him to the ground in spite of
himself over the haunches of his horse, and with so heavy a fall that
he lay to all appearance dead, not stirring hand or foot. The instant
Sancho saw him fall he slid down from the cork tree, and made all haste
to where his master was, who, dismounting from Rocinante, went and
stood over him of the Mirrors, and unlacing his helmet to see if he was
dead, and to give him air if he should happen to be alive, he saw—who
can say what he saw, without filling all who hear it with astonishment,
wonder, and awe? He saw, the history says, the very countenance, the
very face, the very look, the very physiognomy, the very effigy, the
very image of the bachelor Samson Carrasco! As soon as he saw it he
called out in a loud voice, “Make haste here, Sancho, and behold what
thou art to see but not to believe; quick, my son, and learn what magic
can do, and wizards and enchanters are capable of.”

Sancho came up, and when he saw the countenance of the bachelor
Carrasco, he fell to crossing himself a thousand times, and blessing
himself as many more. All this time the prostrate knight showed no
signs of life, and Sancho said to Don Quixote, “It is my opinion,
señor, that in any case your worship should take and thrust your sword
into the mouth of this one here that looks like the bachelor Samson
Carrasco; perhaps in him you will kill one of your enemies, the
enchanters.”

“Thy advice is not bad,” said Don Quixote, “for of enemies the fewer
the better;” and he was drawing his sword to carry into effect Sancho’s
counsel and suggestion, when the squire of the Mirrors came up, now
without the nose which had made him so hideous, and cried out in a loud
voice, “Mind what you are about, Señor Don Quixote; that is your
friend, the bachelor Samson Carrasco, you have at your feet, and I am
his squire.”

“And the nose?” said Sancho, seeing him without the hideous feature he
had before; to which he replied, “I have it here in my pocket,” and
putting his hand into his right pocket, he pulled out a masquerade nose
of varnished pasteboard of the make already described; and Sancho,
examining him more and more closely, exclaimed aloud in a voice of
amazement, “Holy Mary be good to me! Isn’t it Tom Cecial, my neighbour
and gossip?”

“Why, to be sure I am!” returned the now unnosed squire; “Tom Cecial I
am, goss