ñor, will there be enough in this cloth to make me a cap?’ Measuring
the cloth I said there would. He probably suspected—as I supposed, and
I supposed right—that I wanted to steal some of the cloth, led to think
so by his own roguery and the bad opinion people have of tailors; and
he told me to see if there would be enough for two. I guessed what he
would be at, and I said ‘yes.’ He, still following up his original
unworthy notion, went on adding cap after cap, and I ‘yes’ after ‘yes,’
until we got as far as five. He has just this moment come for them; I
gave them to him, but he won’t pay me for the making; on the contrary,
he calls upon me to pay him, or else return his cloth.”

“Is all this true, brother?” said Sancho.

“Yes,” replied the man; “but will your worship make him show the five
caps he has made me?”

“With all my heart,” said the tailor; and drawing his hand from under
his cloak he showed five caps stuck upon the five fingers of it, and
said, “there are the caps this good man asks for; and by God and upon
my conscience I haven’t a scrap of cloth left, and I’ll let the work be
examined by the inspectors of the trade.”

All present laughed at the number of caps and the novelty of the suit;
Sancho set himself to think for a moment, and then said, “It seems to
me that in this case it is not necessary to deliver long-winded
arguments, but only to give off-hand the judgment of an honest man; and
so my decision is that the tailor lose the making and the labourer the
cloth, and that the caps go to the prisoners in the gaol, and let there
be no more about it.”

If the previous decision about the cattle dealer’s purse excited the
admiration of the bystanders, this provoked their laughter; however,
the governor’s orders were after all executed. All this, having been
taken down by his chronicler, was at once despatched to the duke, who
was looking out for it with great eagerness; and here let us leave the
good Sancho; for his master, sorely troubled in mind by Altisidora’s
music, has pressing claims upon us now.



p45e.jpg (11K)



CHAPTER XLVI.
OF THE TERRIBLE BELL AND CAT FRIGHT THAT DON QUIXOTE GOT IN THE COURSE
OF THE ENAMOURED ALTISIDORA’S WOOING




p46a.jpg (58K)

Full Size



We left Don Quixote wrapped up in the reflections which the music of
the enamourned maid Altisidora had given rise to. He went to bed with
them, and just like fleas they would not let him sleep or get a
moment’s rest, and the broken stitches of his stockings helped them.
But as Time is fleet and no obstacle can stay his course, he came
riding on the hours, and morning very soon arrived. Seeing which Don
Quixote quitted the soft down, and, nowise slothful, dressed himself in
his chamois suit and put on his travelling boots to hide the disaster
to his stockings. He threw over him his scarlet mantle, put on his head
a montera of green velvet trimmed with silver edging, flung across his
shoulder the baldric with his good trenchant sword, took up a large
rosary that he always carried with him, and with great solemnity and
precision of gait proceeded to the antechamber where the duke and
duchess were already dressed and waiting for him. But as he passed
through a gallery, Altisidora and the other damsel, her friend, were
lying in wait for him, and the instant Altisidora saw him she pretended
to faint, while her friend caught her in her lap, and began hastily
unlacing the bosom of her dress.

Don Quixote observed it, and approaching them said, “I know very well
what this seizure arises from.”

“I know not from what,” replied the friend, “for Altisidora is the
healthiest damsel in all this house, and I have never heard her
complain all the time I have known her. A plague on all the
knights-errant in the world, if they be all ungrateful! Go away, Señor
Don Quixote; for this poor child will not come to herself again so long
as you are here.”



p46b.jpg (320K)

Full 