emselves, having first with
rough politeness pressed Don Quixote to take a seat upon a trough which
they placed for him upside down. Don Quixote seated himself, and Sancho
remained standing to serve the cup, which was made of horn. Seeing him
standing, his master said to him:

“That thou mayest see, Sancho, the good that knight-errantry contains
in itself, and how those who fill any office in it are on the high road
to be speedily honoured and esteemed by the world, I desire that thou
seat thyself here at my side and in the company of these worthy people,
and that thou be one with me who am thy master and natural lord, and
that thou eat from my plate and drink from whatever I drink from; for
the same may be said of knight-errantry as of love, that it levels
all.”

“Great thanks,” said Sancho, “but I may tell your worship that provided
I have enough to eat, I can eat it as well, or better, standing, and by
myself, than seated alongside of an emperor. And indeed, if the truth
is to be told, what I eat in my corner without form or fuss has much
more relish for me, even though it be bread and onions, than the
turkeys of those other tables where I am forced to chew slowly, drink
little, wipe my mouth every minute, and cannot sneeze or cough if I
want or do other things that are the privileges of liberty and
solitude. So, señor, as for these honours which your worship would put
upon me as a servant and follower of knight-errantry, exchange them for
other things which may be of more use and advantage to me; for these,
though I fully acknowledge them as received, I renounce from this
moment to the end of the world.”

“For all that,” said Don Quixote, “thou must seat thyself, because him
who humbleth himself God exalteth;” and seizing him by the arm he
forced him to sit down beside himself.

The goatherds did not understand this jargon about squires and
knights-errant, and all they did was to eat in silence and stare at
their guests, who with great elegance and appetite were stowing away
pieces as big as one’s fist. The course of meat finished, they spread
upon the sheepskins a great heap of parched acorns, and with them they
put down a half cheese harder than if it had been made of mortar. All
this while the horn was not idle, for it went round so constantly, now
full, now empty, like the bucket of a water-wheel, that it soon drained
one of the two wine-skins that were in sight. When Don Quixote had
quite appeased his appetite he took up a handful of the acorns, and
contemplating them attentively delivered himself somewhat in this
fashion:

“Happy the age, happy the time, to which the ancients gave the name of
golden, not because in that fortunate age the gold so coveted in this
our iron one was gained without toil, but because they that lived in it
knew not the two words “_mine_” and “_thine_”! In that blessed age all
things were in common; to win the daily food no labour was required of
any save to stretch forth his hand and gather it from the sturdy oaks
that stood generously inviting him with their sweet ripe fruit. The
clear streams and running brooks yielded their savoury limpid waters in
noble abundance. The busy and sagacious bees fixed their republic in
the clefts of the rocks and hollows of the trees, offering without
usance the plenteous produce of their fragrant toil to every hand. The
mighty cork trees, unenforced save of their own courtesy, shed the
broad light bark that served at first to roof the houses supported by
rude stakes, a protection against the inclemency of heaven alone. Then
all was peace, all friendship, all concord; as yet the dull share of
the crooked plough had not dared to rend and pierce the tender bowels
of our first mother that without compulsion yielded from every portion
of her broad fertile bosom all that could satisfy, sustain, and delight
the children that then possessed her. Then was it that the innocent and
fair young shepherdess