me of the
hatred the wicked bear me.”

“So say I,” returned Sancho; “his heart rend in twain, I trow, who saw
her once, to see her now.”

“Thou mayest well say that, Sancho,” replied Don Quixote, “as thou
sawest her in the full perfection of her beauty; for the enchantment
does not go so far as to pervert thy vision or hide her loveliness from
thee; against me alone and against my eyes is the strength of its venom
directed. Nevertheless, there is one thing which has occurred to me,
and that is that thou didst ill describe her beauty to me, for, as well
as I recollect, thou saidst that her eyes were pearls; but eyes that
are like pearls are rather the eyes of a sea-bream than of a lady, and
I am persuaded that Dulcinea’s must be green emeralds, full and soft,
with two rainbows for eyebrows; take away those pearls from her eyes
and transfer them to her teeth; for beyond a doubt, Sancho, thou hast
taken the one for the other, the eyes for the teeth.”

“Very likely,” said Sancho; “for her beauty bewildered me as much as
her ugliness did your worship; but let us leave it all to God, who
alone knows what is to happen in this vale of tears, in this evil world
of ours, where there is hardly a thing to be found without some mixture
of wickedness, roguery, and rascality. But one thing, señor, troubles
me more than all the rest, and that is thinking what is to be done when
your worship conquers some giant, or some other knight, and orders him
to go and present himself before the beauty of the lady Dulcinea. Where
is this poor giant, or this poor wretch of a vanquished knight, to find
her? I think I can see them wandering all over El Toboso, looking like
noddies, and asking for my lady Dulcinea; and even if they meet her in
the middle of the street they won’t know her any more than they would
my father.”

“Perhaps, Sancho,” returned Don Quixote, “the enchantment does not go
so far as to deprive conquered and presented giants and knights of the
power of recognising Dulcinea; we will try by experiment with one or
two of the first I vanquish and send to her, whether they see her or
not, by commanding them to return and give me an account of what
happened to them in this respect.”

“I declare, I think what your worship has proposed is excellent,” said
Sancho; “and that by this plan we shall find out what we want to know;
and if it be that it is only from your worship she is hidden, the
misfortune will be more yours than hers; but so long as the lady
Dulcinea is well and happy, we on our part will make the best of it,
and get on as well as we can, seeking our adventures, and leaving Time
to take his own course; for he is the best physician for these and
greater ailments.”

Don Quixote was about to reply to Sancho Panza, but he was prevented by
a cart crossing the road full of the most diverse and strange
personages and figures that could be imagined. He who led the mules and
acted as carter was a hideous demon; the cart was open to the sky,
without a tilt or cane roof, and the first figure that presented itself
to Don Quixote’s eyes was that of Death itself with a human face; next
to it was an angel with large painted wings, and at one side an
emperor, with a crown, to all appearance of gold, on his head. At the
feet of Death was the god called Cupid, without his bandage, but with
his bow, quiver, and arrows; there was also a knight in full armour,
except that he had no morion or helmet, but only a hat decked with
plumes of divers colours; and along with these there were others with a
variety of costumes and faces. All this, unexpectedly encountered, took
Don Quixote somewhat aback, and struck terror into the heart of Sancho;
but the next instant Don Quixote was glad of it, believing that some
new perilous adventure was presenting itself to him, and under this
impression, and with a spirit prepared to face any danger, he planted
himself in front of the cart, and in a loud and me