p, and I am persuaded there will not be a country or language in
which there will not be a translation of it.”

“One of the things,” here observed Don Quixote, “that ought to give
most pleasure to a virtuous and eminent man is to find himself in his
lifetime in print and in type, familiar in people’s mouths with a good
name; I say with a good name, for if it be the opposite, then there is
no death to be compared to it.”

“If it goes by good name and fame,” said the bachelor, “your worship
alone bears away the palm from all the knights-errant; for the Moor in
his own language, and the Christian in his, have taken care to set
before us your gallantry, your high courage in encountering dangers,
your fortitude in adversity, your patience under misfortunes as well as
wounds, the purity and continence of the platonic loves of your worship
and my lady Doña Dulcinea del Toboso—”

“I never heard my lady Dulcinea called Doña,” observed Sancho here;
“nothing more than the lady Dulcinea del Toboso; so here already the
history is wrong.”

“That is not an objection of any importance,” replied Carrasco.

“Certainly not,” said Don Quixote; “but tell me, señor bachelor, what
deeds of mine are they that are made most of in this history?”

“On that point,” replied the bachelor, “opinions differ, as tastes do;
some swear by the adventure of the windmills that your worship took to
be Briareuses and giants; others by that of the fulling mills; one
cries up the description of the two armies that afterwards took the
appearance of two droves of sheep; another that of the dead body on its
way to be buried at Segovia; a third says the liberation of the galley
slaves is the best of all, and a fourth that nothing comes up to the
affair with the Benedictine giants, and the battle with the valiant
Biscayan.”

“Tell me, señor bachelor,” said Sancho at this point, “does the
adventure with the Yanguesans come in, when our good Rocinante went
hankering after dainties?”

“The sage has left nothing in the ink-bottle,” replied Samson; “he
tells all and sets down everything, even to the capers that worthy
Sancho cut in the blanket.”

“I cut no capers in the blanket,” returned Sancho; “in the air I did,
and more of them than I liked.”

“There is no human history in the world, I suppose,” said Don Quixote,
“that has not its ups and downs, but more than others such as deal with
chivalry, for they can never be entirely made up of prosperous
adventures.”

“For all that,” replied the bachelor, “there are those who have read
the history who say they would have been glad if the author had left
out some of the countless cudgellings that were inflicted on Señor Don
Quixote in various encounters.”

“That’s where the truth of the history comes in,” said Sancho.

“At the same time they might fairly have passed them over in silence,”
observed Don Quixote; “for there is no need of recording events which
do not change or affect the truth of a history, if they tend to bring
the hero of it into contempt. Æneas was not in truth and earnest so
pious as Virgil represents him, nor Ulysses so wise as Homer describes
him.”

“That is true,” said Samson; “but it is one thing to write as a poet,
another to write as a historian; the poet may describe or sing things,
not as they were, but as they ought to have been; but the historian has
to write them down, not as they ought to have been, but as they were,
without adding anything to the truth or taking anything from it.”

“Well then,” said Sancho, “if this señor Moor goes in for telling the
truth, no doubt among my master’s drubbings mine are to be found; for
they never took the measure of his worship’s shoulders without doing
the same for my whole body; but I have no right to wonder at that, for,
as my master himself says, the members must share the pain of the
head.”

“You are a sly dog, Sancho,” said Don Quixote; “i’ faith, you have no
want of memory when you ch