for I believe you have none at
all), say such things, and so full of sound maxims and sage remarks,
very different from what was expected of your worship’s intelligence by
those who sent us or by us who came here. Every day we see something
new in this world; jokes become realities, and the jokers find the
tables turned upon them.”

Night came, and with the permission of Doctor Pedro Recio, the governor
had supper. They then got ready to go the rounds, and he started with
the majordomo, the secretary, the head-carver, the chronicler charged
with recording his deeds, and alguacils and notaries enough to form a
fair-sized squadron. In the midst marched Sancho with his staff, as
fine a sight as one could wish to see, and but a few streets of the
town had been traversed when they heard a noise as of a clashing of
swords. They hastened to the spot, and found that the combatants were
but two, who seeing the authorities approaching stood still, and one of
them exclaimed, “Help, in the name of God and the king! Are men to be
allowed to rob in the middle of this town, and rush out and attack
people in the very streets?”

“Be calm, my good man,” said Sancho, “and tell me what the cause of
this quarrel is; for I am the governor.”

Said the other combatant, “Señor governor, I will tell you in a very
few words. Your worship must know that this gentleman has just now won
more than a thousand reals in that gambling house opposite, and God
knows how. I was there, and gave more than one doubtful point in his
favour, very much against what my conscience told me. He made off with
his winnings, and when I made sure he was going to give me a crown or
so at least by way of a present, as it is usual and customary to give
men of quality of my sort who stand by to see fair or foul play, and
back up swindles, and prevent quarrels, he pocketed his money and left
the house. Indignant at this I followed him, and speaking to him fairly
and civilly asked him to give me if it were only eight reals, for he
knows I am an honest man and that I have neither profession nor
property, for my parents never brought me up to any or left me any; but
the rogue, who is a greater thief than Cacus and a greater sharper than
Andradilla, would not give me more than four reals; so your worship may
see how little shame and conscience he has. But by my faith if you had
not come up I’d have made him disgorge his winnings, and he’d have
learned what the range of the steel-yard was.”

“What say you to this?” asked Sancho. The other replied that all his
antagonist said was true, and that he did not choose to give him more
than four reals because he very often gave him money; and that those
who expected presents ought to be civil and take what is given them
with a cheerful countenance, and not make any claim against winners
unless they know them for certain to be sharpers and their winnings to
be unfairly won; and that there could be no better proof that he
himself was an honest man than his having refused to give anything; for
sharpers always pay tribute to lookers-on who know them.

“That is true,” said the majordomo; “let your worship consider what is
to be done with these men.”

“What is to be done,” said Sancho, “is this; you, the winner, be you
good, bad, or indifferent, give this assailant of yours a hundred reals
at once, and you must disburse thirty more for the poor prisoners; and
you who have neither profession nor property, and hang about the island
in idleness, take these hundred reals now, and some time of the day
to-morrow quit the island under sentence of banishment for ten years,
and under pain of completing it in another life if you violate the
sentence, for I’ll hang you on a gibbet, or at least the hangman will
by my orders; not a word from either of you, or I’ll make him feel my
hand.”

The one paid down the money and the other took it, and the latter
quitted the island, while the other went home