g
nothing to the contrary, would it be reasonable in thee to desire to
take that diamond and place it between an anvil and a hammer, and by
mere force of blows and strength of arm try if it were as hard and as
fine as they said? And if thou didst, and if the stone should resist so
silly a test, that would add nothing to its value or reputation; and if
it were broken, as it might be, would not all be lost? Undoubtedly it
would, leaving its owner to be rated as a fool in the opinion of all.
Consider, then, Anselmo my friend, that Camilla is a diamond of the
finest quality as well in thy estimation as in that of others, and that
it is contrary to reason to expose her to the risk of being broken; for
if she remains intact she cannot rise to a higher value than she now
possesses; and if she give way and be unable to resist, bethink thee
now how thou wilt be deprived of her, and with what good reason thou
wilt complain of thyself for having been the cause of her ruin and
thine own. Remember there is no jewel in the world so precious as a
chaste and virtuous woman, and that the whole honour of women consists
in reputation; and since thy wife’s is of that high excellence that
thou knowest, wherefore shouldst thou seek to call that truth in
question? Remember, my friend, that woman is an imperfect animal, and
that impediments are not to be placed in her way to make her trip and
fall, but that they should be removed, and her path left clear of all
obstacles, so that without hindrance she may run her course freely to
attain the desired perfection, which consists in being virtuous.
Naturalists tell us that the ermine is a little animal which has a fur
of purest white, and that when the hunters wish to take it, they make
use of this artifice. Having ascertained the places which it frequents
and passes, they stop the way to them with mud, and then rousing it,
drive it towards the spot, and as soon as the ermine comes to the mud
it halts, and allows itself to be taken captive rather than pass
through the mire, and spoil and sully its whiteness, which it values
more than life and liberty. The virtuous and chaste woman is an ermine,
and whiter and purer than snow is the virtue of modesty; and he who
wishes her not to lose it, but to keep and preserve it, must adopt a
course different from that employed with the ermine; he must not put
before her the mire of the gifts and attentions of persevering lovers,
because perhaps—and even without a perhaps—she may not have sufficient
virtue and natural strength in herself to pass through and tread under
foot these impediments; they must be removed, and the brightness of
virtue and the beauty of a fair fame must be put before her. A virtuous
woman, too, is like a mirror, of clear shining crystal, liable to be
tarnished and dimmed by every breath that touches it. She must be
treated as relics are; adored, not touched. She must be protected and
prized as one protects and prizes a fair garden full of roses and
flowers, the owner of which allows no one to trespass or pluck a
blossom; enough for others that from afar and through the iron grating
they may enjoy its fragrance and its beauty. Finally let me repeat to
thee some verses that come to my mind; I heard them in a modern comedy,
and it seems to me they bear upon the point we are discussing. A
prudent old man was giving advice to another, the father of a young
girl, to lock her up, watch over her and keep her in seclusion, and
among other arguments he used these:

Woman is a thing of glass;
    But her brittleness ’tis best
    Not too curiously to test:
Who knows what may come to pass?

Breaking is an easy matter,
    And it’s folly to expose
    What you cannot mend to blows;
What you can’t make whole to shatter.

This, then, all may hold as true,
    And the reason’s plain to see;
    For if Danaës there be,
There are golden showers too.


“All that I have said to thee so far, Anselm