ught in amiss here.”

Don Quixote turned all colours, which, on his sunburnt face, mottled it
till it looked like jasper. The duke and duchess suppressed their
laughter so as not altogether to mortify Don Quixote, for they saw
through Sancho’s impertinence; and to change the conversation, and keep
Sancho from uttering more absurdities, the duchess asked Don Quixote
what news he had of the lady Dulcinea, and if he had sent her any
presents of giants or miscreants lately, for he could not but have
vanquished a good many.

To which Don Quixote replied, “Señora, my misfortunes, though they had
a beginning, will never have an end. I have vanquished giants and I
have sent her caitiffs and miscreants; but where are they to find her
if she is enchanted and turned into the most ill-favoured peasant wench
that can be imagined?”

“I don’t know,” said Sancho Panza; “to me she seems the fairest
creature in the world; at any rate, in nimbleness and jumping she won’t
give in to a tumbler; by my faith, señora duchess, she leaps from the
ground on to the back of an ass like a cat.”

“Have you seen her enchanted, Sancho?” asked the duke.

“What, seen her!” said Sancho; “why, who the devil was it but myself
that first thought of the enchantment business? She is as much
enchanted as my father.”

The ecclesiastic, when he heard them talking of giants and caitiffs and
enchantments, began to suspect that this must be Don Quixote of La
Mancha, whose story the duke was always reading; and he had himself
often reproved him for it, telling him it was foolish to read such
fooleries; and becoming convinced that his suspicion was correct,
addressing the duke, he said very angrily to him, “Señor, your
excellence will have to give account to God for what this good man
does. This Don Quixote, or Don Simpleton, or whatever his name is,
cannot, I imagine, be such a blockhead as your excellence would have
him, holding out encouragement to him to go on with his vagaries and
follies.” Then turning to address Don Quixote he said, “And you,
num-skull, who put it into your head that you are a knight-errant, and
vanquish giants and capture miscreants? Go your ways in a good hour,
and in a good hour be it said to you. Go home and bring up your
children if you have any, and attend to your business, and give over
going wandering about the world, gaping and making a laughing-stock of
yourself to all who know you and all who don’t. Where, in heaven’s
name, have you discovered that there are or ever were knights-errant?
Where are there giants in Spain or miscreants in La Mancha, or
enchanted Dulcineas, or all the rest of the silly things they tell
about you?”

Don Quixote listened attentively to the reverend gentleman’s words, and
as soon as he perceived he had done speaking, regardless of the
presence of the duke and duchess, he sprang to his feet with angry
looks and an agitated countenance, and said—But the reply deserves a
chapter to itself.



p31e.jpg (46K)



CHAPTER XXXII.
OF THE REPLY DON QUIXOTE GAVE HIS CENSURER, WITH OTHER INCIDENTS, GRAVE
AND DROLL




p32a.jpg (152K)

Full Size



Don Quixote, then, having risen to his feet, trembling from head to
foot like a man dosed with mercury, said in a hurried, agitated voice,
“The place I am in, the presence in which I stand, and the respect I
have and always have had for the profession to which your worship
belongs, hold and bind the hands of my just indignation; and as well
for these reasons as because I know, as everyone knows, that a
gownsman’s weapon is the same as a woman’s, the tongue, I will with
mine engage in equal combat with your worship, from whom one might have
expected good advice instead of foul abuse. Pious, well-meant reproof
requires a different demeanour and arguments of another sort; at any
rate, to have reproved me in public, and so roughly, exceeds the bounds
of proper reproof, for that comes better with gentlen