d from hunger and scanty clothing, nothing distressed us so much
as hearing and seeing at every turn the unexampled and unheard-of
cruelties my master inflicted upon the Christians. Every day he hanged
a man, impaled one, cut off the ears of another; and all with so little
provocation, or so entirely without any, that the Turks acknowledged he
did it merely for the sake of doing it, and because he was by nature
murderously disposed towards the whole human race. The only one that
fared at all well with him was a Spanish soldier, something de Saavedra
by name, to whom he never gave a blow himself, or ordered a blow to be
given, or addressed a hard word, although he had done things that will
dwell in the memory of the people there for many a year, and all to
recover his liberty; and for the least of the many things he did we all
dreaded that he would be impaled, and he himself was in fear of it more
than once; and only that time does not allow, I could tell you now
something of what that soldier did, that would interest and astonish
you much more than the narration of my own tale.

To go on with my story; the courtyard of our prison was overlooked by
the windows of the house belonging to a wealthy Moor of high position;
and these, as is usual in Moorish houses, were rather loopholes than
windows, and besides were covered with thick and close lattice-work. It
so happened, then, that as I was one day on the terrace of our prison
with three other comrades, trying, to pass away the time, how far we
could leap with our chains, we being alone, for all the other
Christians had gone out to work, I chanced to raise my eyes, and from
one of these little closed windows I saw a reed appear with a cloth
attached to the end of it, and it kept waving to and fro, and moving as
if making signs to us to come and take it. We watched it, and one of
those who were with me went and stood under the reed to see whether
they would let it drop, or what they would do, but as he did so the
reed was raised and moved from side to side, as if they meant to say
“no” by a shake of the head. The Christian came back, and it was again
lowered, making the same movements as before. Another of my comrades
went, and with him the same happened as with the first, and then the
third went forward, but with the same result as the first and second.
Seeing this I did not like not to try my luck, and as soon as I came
under the reed it was dropped and fell inside the baño at my feet. I
hastened to untie the cloth, in which I perceived a knot, and in this
were ten cianis, which are coins of base gold, current among the Moors,
and each worth ten reals of our money.

It is needless to say I rejoiced over this godsend, and my joy was not
less than my wonder as I strove to imagine how this good fortune could
have come to us, but to me specially; for the evident unwillingness to
drop the reed for any but me showed that it was for me the favour was
intended. I took my welcome money, broke the reed, and returned to the
terrace, and looking up at the window, I saw a very white hand put out
that opened and shut very quickly. From this we gathered or fancied
that it must be some woman living in that house that had done us this
kindness, and to show that we were grateful for it, we made salaams
after the fashion of the Moors, bowing the head, bending the body, and
crossing the arms on the breast. Shortly afterwards at the same window
a small cross made of reeds was put out and immediately withdrawn. This
sign led us to believe that some Christian woman was a captive in the
house, and that it was she who had been so good to us; but the
whiteness of the hand and the bracelets we had perceived made us
dismiss that idea, though we thought it might be one of the Christian
renegades whom their masters very often take as lawful wives, and
gladly, for they prefer them to the women of their own nation. In all
our conjectures we were wide o