
Lady the Virgin Mary.’”

We read the paper and it ran thus:

“When I was a child my father had a slave who taught me to pray the
Christian prayer in my own language, and told me many things about Lela
Marien. The Christian died, and I know that she did not go to the fire,
but to Allah, because since then I have seen her twice, and she told me
to go to the land of the Christians to see Lela Marien, who had great
love for me. I know not how to go. I have seen many Christians, but
except thyself none has seemed to me to be a gentleman. I am young and
beautiful, and have plenty of money to take with me. See if thou canst
contrive how we may go, and if thou wilt thou shalt be my husband
there, and if thou wilt not it will not distress me, for Lela Marien
will find me someone to marry me. I myself have written this: have a
care to whom thou givest it to read: trust no Moor, for they are all
perfidious. I am greatly troubled on this account, for I would not have
thee confide in anyone, because if my father knew it he would at once
fling me down a well and cover me with stones. I will put a thread to
the reed; tie the answer to it, and if thou hast no one to write for
thee in Arabic, tell it to me by signs, for Lela Marien will make me
understand thee. She and Allah and this cross, which I often kiss as
the captive bade me, protect thee.”

Judge, sirs, whether we had reason for surprise and joy at the words of
this paper; and both one and the other were so great, that the renegade
perceived that the paper had not been found by chance, but had been in
reality addressed to someone of us, and he begged us, if what he
suspected were the truth, to trust him and tell him all, for he would
risk his life for our freedom; and so saying he took out from his
breast a metal crucifix, and with many tears swore by the God the image
represented, in whom, sinful and wicked as he was, he truly and
faithfully believed, to be loyal to us and keep secret whatever we
chose to reveal to him; for he thought and almost foresaw that by means
of her who had written that paper, he and all of us would obtain our
liberty, and he himself obtain the object he so much desired, his
restoration to the bosom of the Holy Mother Church, from which by his
own sin and ignorance he was now severed like a corrupt limb. The
renegade said this with so many tears and such signs of repentance,
that with one consent we all agreed to tell him the whole truth of the
matter, and so we gave him a full account of all, without hiding
anything from him. We pointed out to him the window at which the reed
appeared, and he by that means took note of the house, and resolved to
ascertain with particular care who lived in it. We agreed also that it
would be advisable to answer the Moorish lady’s letter, and the
renegade without a moment’s delay took down the words I dictated to
him, which were exactly what I shall tell you, for nothing of
importance that took place in this affair has escaped my memory, or
ever will while life lasts. This, then, was the answer returned to the
Moorish lady:

“The true Allah protect thee, Lady, and that blessed Marien who is the
true mother of God, and who has put it into thy heart to go to the land
of the Christians, because she loves thee. Entreat her that she be
pleased to show thee how thou canst execute the command she gives thee,
for she will, such is her goodness. On my own part, and on that of all
these Christians who are with me, I promise to do all that we can for
thee, even to death. Fail not to write to me and inform me what thou
dost mean to do, and I will always answer thee; for the great Allah has
given us a Christian captive who can speak and write thy language well,
as thou mayest see by this paper; without fear, therefore, thou canst
inform us of all thou wouldst. As to what thou sayest, that if thou
dost reach the land of the Christians thou wilt be my wife, I give thee
my promis