d of me for the
disenchantment of Dulcinea del Toboso, her that is called Aldonza
Lorenzo over there. With three thousand three hundred lashes, less
five, that I’m to give myself, she will be left as entirely
disenchanted as the mother that bore her. Say nothing of this to
anyone; for, make thy affairs public, and some will say they are white
and others will say they are black. I shall leave this in a few days
for my government, to which I am going with a mighty great desire to
make money, for they tell me all new governors set out with the same
desire; I will feel the pulse of it and will let thee know if thou art
to come and live with me or not. Dapple is well and sends many
remembrances to thee; I am not going to leave him behind though they
took me away to be Grand Turk. My lady the duchess kisses thy hands a
thousand times; do thou make a return with two thousand, for as my
master says, nothing costs less or is cheaper than civility. God has
not been pleased to provide another valise for me with another hundred
crowns, like the one the other day; but never mind, my Teresa, the
bell-ringer is in safe quarters, and all will come out in the scouring
of the government; only it troubles me greatly what they tell me—that
once I have tasted it I will eat my hands off after it; and if that is
so it will not come very cheap to me; though to be sure the maimed have
a benefice of their own in the alms they beg for; so that one way or
another thou wilt be rich and in luck. God give it to thee as he can,
and keep me to serve thee. From this castle, the 20th of July, 1614.


Thy husband, the governor,
SANCHO PANZA


When she had done reading the letter the duchess said to Sancho, “On
two points the worthy governor goes rather astray; one is in saying or
hinting that this government has been bestowed upon him for the lashes
that he is to give himself, when he knows (and he cannot deny it) that
when my lord the duke promised it to him nobody ever dreamt of such a
thing as lashes; the other is that he shows himself here to be very
covetous; and I would not have him a money-seeker, for ‘covetousness
bursts the bag,’ and the covetous governor does ungoverned justice.”

“I don’t mean it that way, señora,” said Sancho; “and if you think the
letter doesn’t run as it ought to do, it’s only to tear it up and make
another; and maybe it will be a worse one if it is left to my
gumption.”

“No, no,” said the duchess, “this one will do, and I wish the duke to
see it.”

With this they betook themselves to a garden where they were to dine,
and the duchess showed Sancho’s letter to the duke, who was highly
delighted with it. They dined, and after the cloth had been removed and
they had amused themselves for a while with Sancho’s rich conversation,
the melancholy sound of a fife and harsh discordant drum made itself
heard. All seemed somewhat put out by this dull, confused, martial
harmony, especially Don Quixote, who could not keep his seat from pure
disquietude; as to Sancho, it is needless to say that fear drove him to
his usual refuge, the side or the skirts of the duchess; and indeed and
in truth the sound they heard was a most doleful and melancholy one.
While they were still in uncertainty they saw advancing towards them
through the garden two men clad in mourning robes so long and flowing
that they trailed upon the ground. As they marched they beat two great
drums which were likewise draped in black, and beside them came the
fife player, black and sombre like the others. Following these came a
personage of gigantic stature enveloped rather than clad in a gown of
the deepest black, the skirt of which was of prodigious dimensions.
Over the gown, girdling or crossing his figure, he had a broad baldric
which was also black, and from which hung a huge scimitar with a black
scabbard and furniture. He had his face covered with a transparent
black veil, through which might be descried a v