such conclusive arguments, and
such figures and mathematical proofs, that all were convinced of the
value of the science, and Corchuelo cured of his dogmatism.

It grew dark; but before they reached the town it seemed to them all as
if there was a heaven full of countless glittering stars in front of
it. They heard, too, the pleasant mingled notes of a variety of
instruments, flutes, drums, psalteries, pipes, tabors, and timbrels,
and as they drew near they perceived that the trees of a leafy arcade
that had been constructed at the entrance of the town were filled with
lights unaffected by the wind, for the breeze at the time was so gentle
that it had not power to stir the leaves on the trees. The musicians
were the life of the wedding, wandering through the pleasant grounds in
separate bands, some dancing, others singing, others playing the
various instruments already mentioned. In short, it seemed as though
mirth and gaiety were frisking and gambolling all over the meadow.
Several other persons were engaged in erecting raised benches from
which people might conveniently see the plays and dances that were to
be performed the next day on the spot dedicated to the celebration of
the marriage of Camacho the rich and the obsequies of Basilio. Don
Quixote would not enter the village, although the peasant as well as
the bachelor pressed him; he excused himself, however, on the grounds,
amply sufficient in his opinion, that it was the custom of
knights-errant to sleep in the fields and woods in preference to towns,
even were it under gilded ceilings; and so turned aside a little out of
the road, very much against Sancho’s will, as the good quarters he had
enjoyed in the castle or house of Don Diego came back to his mind.



p19e.jpg (29K)



CHAPTER XX.
WHEREIN AN ACCOUNT IS GIVEN OF THE WEDDING OF CAMACHO THE RICH,
TOGETHER WITH THE INCIDENT OF BASILIO THE POOR




p20a.jpg (125K)

Full Size



Scarce had the fair Aurora given bright Phœbus time to dry the liquid
pearls upon her golden locks with the heat of his fervent rays, when
Don Quixote, shaking off sloth from his limbs, sprang to his feet and
called to his squire Sancho, who was still snoring; seeing which Don
Quixote ere he roused him thus addressed him: “Happy thou, above all
the dwellers on the face of the earth, that, without envying or being
envied, sleepest with tranquil mind, and that neither enchanters
persecute nor enchantments affright. Sleep, I say, and will say a
hundred times, without any jealous thoughts of thy mistress to make
thee keep ceaseless vigils, or any cares as to how thou art to pay the
debts thou owest, or find to-morrow’s food for thyself and thy needy
little family, to interfere with thy repose. Ambition breaks not thy
rest, nor doth this world’s empty pomp disturb thee, for the utmost
reach of thy anxiety is to provide for thy ass, since upon my shoulders
thou hast laid the support of thyself, the counterpoise and burden that
nature and custom have imposed upon masters. The servant sleeps and the
master lies awake thinking how he is to feed him, advance him, and
reward him. The distress of seeing the sky turn brazen, and withhold
its needful moisture from the earth, is not felt by the servant but by
the master, who in time of scarcity and famine must support him who has
served him in times of plenty and abundance.”



p20b.jpg (365K)

Full Size



To all this Sancho made no reply because he was asleep, nor would he
have wakened up so soon as he did had not Don Quixote brought him to
his senses with the butt of his lance. He awoke at last, drowsy and
lazy, and casting his eyes about in every direction, observed, “There
comes, if I don’t mistake, from the quarter of that arcade a steam and
a smell a great deal more like fried rashers than galingale or thyme; a
wedding that begins with smells like that, by my faith, ought to be
plentiful and unstinting.”

“Have don