ling himself off his horse and
throw himself on the ground with a certain air of dejection, and his
armour rattled as he fell.”

“Well,” said Sancho, “how does your worship make out that to be an
adventure?”

“I do not mean to say,” returned Don Quixote, “that it is a complete
adventure, but that it is the beginning of one, for it is in this way
adventures begin. But listen, for it seems he is tuning a lute or
guitar, and from the way he is spitting and clearing his chest he must
be getting ready to sing something.”

“Faith, you are right,” said Sancho, “and no doubt he is some enamoured
knight.”

“There is no knight-errant that is not,” said Don Quixote; “but let us
listen to him, for, if he sings, by that thread we shall extract the
ball of his thoughts; because out of the abundance of the heart the
mouth speaketh.”

Sancho was about to reply to his master, but the Knight of the Grove’s
voice, which was neither very bad nor very good, stopped him, and
listening attentively the pair heard him sing this

SONNET

Your pleasure, prithee, lady mine, unfold;
Declare the terms that I am to obey;
My will to yours submissively I mould,
And from your law my feet shall never stray.
Would you I die, to silent grief a prey?
Then count me even now as dead and cold;
Would you I tell my woes in some new way?
Then shall my tale by Love itself be told.
The unison of opposites to prove,
Of the soft wax and diamond hard am I;
But still, obedient to the laws of love,
Here, hard or soft, I offer you my breast,
Whate’er you grave or stamp thereon shall rest
Indelible for all eternity.


With an “Ah me!” that seemed to be drawn from the inmost recesses of
his heart, the Knight of the Grove brought his lay to an end, and
shortly afterwards exclaimed in a melancholy and piteous voice, “O
fairest and most ungrateful woman on earth! What! can it be, most
serene Casildea de Vandalia, that thou wilt suffer this thy captive
knight to waste away and perish in ceaseless wanderings and rude and
arduous toils? It is not enough that I have compelled all the knights
of Navarre, all the Leonese, all the Tartesians, all the Castilians,
and finally all the knights of La Mancha, to confess thee the most
beautiful in the world?”

“Not so,” said Don Quixote at this, “for I am of La Mancha, and I have
never confessed anything of the sort, nor could I nor should I confess
a thing so much to the prejudice of my lady’s beauty; thou seest how
this knight is raving, Sancho. But let us listen, perhaps he will tell
us more about himself.”

“That he will,” returned Sancho, “for he seems in a mood to bewail
himself for a month at a stretch.”

But this was not the case, for the Knight of the Grove, hearing voices
near him, instead of continuing his lamentation, stood up and exclaimed
in a distinct but courteous tone, “Who goes there? What are you? Do you
belong to the number of the happy or of the miserable?”

“Of the miserable,” answered Don Quixote.

“Then come to me,” said he of the Grove, “and rest assured that it is
to woe itself and affliction itself you come.”

Don Quixote, finding himself answered in such a soft and courteous
manner, went over to him, and so did Sancho.

The doleful knight took Don Quixote by the arm, saying, “Sit down here,
sir knight; for, that you are one, and of those that profess
knight-errantry, it is to me a sufficient proof to have found you in
this place, where solitude and night, the natural couch and proper
retreat of knights-errant, keep you company.” To which Don made answer,
“A knight I am of the profession you mention, and though sorrows,
misfortunes, and calamities have made my heart their abode, the
compassion I feel for the misfortunes of others has not been thereby
banished from it. From what you have just now sung I gather that yours
spring from love, I mean from the love you bear that fair ingrate you
named in your lament.”

In the meantime, they