tting his mouth to his master’s ear began chattering his teeth
rapidly; and having kept this up as long as one would be saying a
credo, with another spring he brought himself to the ground, and the
same instant Master Pedro ran in great haste and fell upon his knees
before Don Quixote, and embracing his legs exclaimed, “These legs do I
embrace as I would embrace the two pillars of Hercules, O illustrious
reviver of knight-errantry, so long consigned to oblivion! O never yet
duly extolled knight, Don Quixote of La Mancha, courage of the
faint-hearted, prop of the tottering, arm of the fallen, staff and
counsel of all who are unfortunate!”



p25b.jpg (373K)

Full Size



Don Quixote was thunderstruck, Sancho astounded, the cousin staggered,
the page astonished, the man from the braying town agape, the landlord
in perplexity, and, in short, everyone amazed at the words of the
puppet-showman, who went on to say, “And thou, worthy Sancho Panza, the
best squire and squire to the best knight in the world! Be of good
cheer, for thy good wife Teresa is well, and she is at this moment
hackling a pound of flax; and more by token she has at her left hand a
jug with a broken spout that holds a good drop of wine, with which she
solaces herself at her work.”

“That I can well believe,” said Sancho. “She is a lucky one, and if it
was not for her jealousy I would not change her for the giantess
Andandona, who by my master’s account was a very clever and worthy
woman; my Teresa is one of those that won’t let themselves want for
anything, though their heirs may have to pay for it.”

“Now I declare,” said Don Quixote, “he who reads much and travels much
sees and knows a great deal. I say so because what amount of persuasion
could have persuaded me that there are apes in the world that can
divine as I have seen now with my own eyes? For I am that very Don
Quixote of La Mancha this worthy animal refers to, though he has gone
rather too far in my praise; but whatever I may be, I thank heaven that
it has endowed me with a tender and compassionate heart, always
disposed to do good to all and harm to none.”

“If I had money,” said the page, “I would ask señor ape what will
happen to me in the peregrination I am making.”

To this Master Pedro, who had by this time risen from Don Quixote’s
feet, replied, “I have already said that this little beast gives no
answer as to the future; but if he did, not having money would be of no
consequence, for to oblige Señor Don Quixote, here present, I would
give up all the profits in the world. And now, because I have promised
it, and to afford him pleasure, I will set up my show and offer
entertainment to all who are in the inn, without any charge whatever.”
As soon as he heard this, the landlord, delighted beyond measure,
pointed out a place where the show might be fixed, which was done at
once.

Don Quixote was not very well satisfied with the divinations of the
ape, as he did not think it proper that an ape should divine anything,
either past or future; so while Master Pedro was arranging the show, he
retired with Sancho into a corner of the stable, where, without being
overheard by anyone, he said to him, “Look here, Sancho, I have been
seriously thinking over this ape’s extraordinary gift, and have come to
the conclusion that beyond doubt this Master Pedro, his master, has a
pact, tacit or express, with the devil.”

“If the packet is express from the devil,” said Sancho, “it must be a
very dirty packet no doubt; but what good can it do Master Pedro to
have such packets?”

“Thou dost not understand me, Sancho,” said Don Quixote; “I only mean
he must have made some compact with the devil to infuse this power into
the ape, that he may get his living, and after he has grown rich he
will give him his soul, which is what the enemy of mankind wants; this
I am led to believe by observing that the ape only answers about things
past or present, a