xcept that you are a she, and cannot keep quiet? A
plague on your humours and the humours of those you take after! Come
back, come back, my darling; and if you will not be so happy, at any
rate you will be safe in the fold or with your companions; for if you
who ought to keep and lead them, go wandering astray, what will become
of them?”

The goatherd’s talk amused all who heard it, but especially the canon,
who said to him, “As you live, brother, take it easy, and be not in
such a hurry to drive this goat back to the fold; for, being a female,
as you say, she will follow her natural instinct in spite of all you
can do to prevent it. Take this morsel and drink a sup, and that will
soothe your irritation, and in the meantime the goat will rest
herself,” and so saying, he handed him the loins of a cold rabbit on a
fork.

The goatherd took it with thanks, and drank and calmed himself, and
then said, “I should be sorry if your worships were to take me for a
simpleton for having spoken so seriously as I did to this animal; but
the truth is there is a certain mystery in the words I used. I am a
clown, but not so much of one but that I know how to behave to men and
to beasts.”

“That I can well believe,” said the curate, “for I know already by
experience that the woods breed men of learning, and shepherds’ huts
harbour philosophers.”

“At all events, señor,” returned the goatherd, “they shelter men of
experience; and that you may see the truth of this and grasp it, though
I may seem to put myself forward without being asked, I will, if it
will not tire you, gentlemen, and you will give me your attention for a
little, tell you a true story which will confirm this gentleman’s word
(and he pointed to the curate) as well as my own.”

To this Don Quixote replied, “Seeing that this affair has a certain
colour of chivalry about it, I for my part, brother, will hear you most
gladly, and so will all these gentlemen, from the high intelligence
they possess and their love of curious novelties that interest, charm,
and entertain the mind, as I feel quite sure your story will do. So
begin, friend, for we are all prepared to listen.”

“I draw my stakes,” said Sancho, “and will retreat with this pasty to
the brook there, where I mean to victual myself for three days; for I
have heard my lord, Don Quixote, say that a knight-errant’s squire
should eat until he can hold no more, whenever he has the chance,
because it often happens them to get by accident into a wood so thick
that they cannot find a way out of it for six days; and if the man is
not well filled or his alforjas well stored, there he may stay, as very
often he does, turned into a dried mummy.”

“Thou art in the right of it, Sancho,” said Don Quixote; “go where thou
wilt and eat all thou canst, for I have had enough, and only want to
give my mind its refreshment, as I shall by listening to this good
fellow’s story.”

“It is what we shall all do,” said the canon; and then begged the
goatherd to begin the promised tale.

The goatherd gave the goat which he held by the horns a couple of slaps
on the back, saying, “Lie down here beside me, Spotty, for we have time
enough to return to our fold.” The goat seemed to understand him, for
as her master seated himself, she stretched herself quietly beside him
and looked up in his face to show him she was all attention to what he
was going to say, and then in these words he began his story.



c50e.jpg (27K)



CHAPTER LI.
WHICH DEALS WITH WHAT THE GOATHERD TOLD THOSE WHO WERE CARRYING OFF DON
QUIXOTE




c51a.jpg (115K)

Full Size




Three leagues from this valley there is a village which, though small,
is one of the richest in all this neighbourhood, and in it there lived
a farmer, a very worthy man, and so much respected that, although to be
so is the natural consequence of being rich, he was even more respected
for his virtue than for the wealth he had acquir