wered that I was already ransomed, and that by the price it might
be seen what value my master set on me, as they had given one thousand
five hundred zoltanis for me; to which she replied, “Hadst thou been my
father’s, I can tell thee, I would not have let him part with thee for
twice as much, for you Christians always tell lies about yourselves and
make yourselves out poor to cheat the Moors.”

“That may be, lady,” said I; “but indeed I dealt truthfully with my
master, as I do and mean to do with everybody in the world.”

“And when dost thou go?” said Zoraida.

“To-morrow, I think,” said I, “for there is a vessel here from France
which sails to-morrow, and I think I shall go in her.”

“Would it not be better,” said Zoraida, “to wait for the arrival of
ships from Spain and go with them and not with the French who are not
your friends?”

“No,” said I; “though if there were intelligence that a vessel were now
coming from Spain it is true I might, perhaps, wait for it; however, it
is more likely I shall depart to-morrow, for the longing I feel to
return to my country and to those I love is so great that it will not
allow me to wait for another opportunity, however more convenient, if
it be delayed.”

“No doubt thou art married in thine own country,” said Zoraida, “and
for that reason thou art anxious to go and see thy wife.”

“I am not married,” I replied, “but I have given my promise to marry on
my arrival there.”

“And is the lady beautiful to whom thou hast given it?” said Zoraida.

“So beautiful,” said I, “that, to describe her worthily and tell thee
the truth, she is very like thee.”

At this her father laughed very heartily and said, “By Allah,
Christian, she must be very beautiful if she is like my daughter, who
is the most beautiful woman in all this kingdom: only look at her well
and thou wilt see I am telling the truth.”

Zoraida’s father as the better linguist helped to interpret most of
these words and phrases, for though she spoke the bastard language,
that, as I have said, is employed there, she expressed her meaning more
by signs than by words.

While we were still engaged in this conversation, a Moor came running
up, exclaiming that four Turks had leaped over the fence or wall of the
garden, and were gathering the fruit though it was not yet ripe. The
old man was alarmed and Zoraida too, for the Moors commonly, and, so to
speak, instinctively have a dread of the Turks, but particularly of the
soldiers, who are so insolent and domineering to the Moors who are
under their power that they treat them worse than if they were their
slaves. Her father said to Zoraida, “Daughter, retire into the house
and shut thyself in while I go and speak to these dogs; and thou,
Christian, pick thy herbs, and go in peace, and Allah bring thee safe
to thy own country.”

I bowed, and he went away to look for the Turks, leaving me alone with
Zoraida, who made as if she were about to retire as her father bade
her; but the moment he was concealed by the trees of the garden,
turning to me with her eyes full of tears she said, “Tameji, cristiano,
tameji?” that is to say, “Art thou going, Christian, art thou going?”

I made answer, “Yes, lady, but not without thee, come what may: be on
the watch for me on the next Juma, and be not alarmed when thou seest
us; for most surely we shall go to the land of the Christians.”

This I said in such a way that she understood perfectly all that passed
between us, and throwing her arm round my neck she began with feeble
steps to move towards the house; but as fate would have it (and it
might have been very unfortunate if Heaven had not otherwise ordered
it), just as we were moving on in the manner and position I have
described, with her arm round my neck, her father, as he returned after
having sent away the Turks, saw how we were walking and we perceived
that he saw us; but Zoraida, ready and quickwitted, took care not to
remove 