lla stood as firm against gifts and promises as
against words, and that there was no use in taking any further trouble,
for the time was all spent to no purpose.

But chance, directing things in a different manner, so ordered it that
Anselmo, having left Lothario and Camilla alone as on other occasions,
shut himself into a chamber and posted himself to watch and listen
through the keyhole to what passed between them, and perceived that for
more than half an hour Lothario did not utter a word to Camilla, nor
would utter a word though he were to be there for an age; and he came
to the conclusion that what his friend had told him about the replies
of Camilla was all invention and falsehood, and to ascertain if it were
so, he came out, and calling Lothario aside asked him what news he had
and in what humour Camilla was. Lothario replied that he was not
disposed to go on with the business, for she had answered him so
angrily and harshly that he had no heart to say anything more to her.

“Ah, Lothario, Lothario,” said Anselmo, “how ill dost thou meet thy
obligations to me, and the great confidence I repose in thee! I have
been just now watching through this keyhole, and I have seen that thou
hast not said a word to Camilla, whence I conclude that on the former
occasions thou hast not spoken to her either, and if this be so, as no
doubt it is, why dost thou deceive me, or wherefore seekest thou by
craft to deprive me of the means I might find of attaining my desire?”

Anselmo said no more, but he had said enough to cover Lothario with
shame and confusion, and he, feeling as it were his honour touched by
having been detected in a lie, swore to Anselmo that he would from that
moment devote himself to satisfying him without any deception, as he
would see if he had the curiosity to watch; though he need not take the
trouble, for the pains he would take to satisfy him would remove all
suspicions from his mind. Anselmo believed him, and to afford him an
opportunity more free and less liable to surprise, he resolved to
absent himself from his house for eight days, betaking himself to that
of a friend of his who lived in a village not far from the city; and,
the better to account for his departure to Camilla, he so arranged it
that the friend should send him a very pressing invitation.

Unhappy, shortsighted Anselmo, what art thou doing, what art thou
plotting, what art thou devising? Bethink thee thou art working against
thyself, plotting thine own dishonour, devising thine own ruin. Thy
wife Camilla is virtuous, thou dost possess her in peace and quietness,
no one assails thy happiness, her thoughts wander not beyond the walls
of thy house, thou art her heaven on earth, the object of her wishes,
the fulfilment of her desires, the measure wherewith she measures her
will, making it conform in all things to thine and Heaven’s. If, then,
the mine of her honour, beauty, virtue, and modesty yields thee without
labour all the wealth it contains and thou canst wish for, why wilt
thou dig the earth in search of fresh veins, of new unknown treasure,
risking the collapse of all, since it but rests on the feeble props of
her weak nature? Bethink thee that from him who seeks impossibilities
that which is possible may with justice be withheld, as was better
expressed by a poet who said:

’Tis mine to seek for life in death,
    Health in disease seek I,
I seek in prison freedom’s breath,
    In traitors loyalty.

So Fate that ever scorns to grant
    Or grace or boon to me,
Since what can never be I want,
    Denies me what might be.


The next day Anselmo took his departure for the village, leaving
instructions with Camilla that during his absence Lothario would come
to look after his house and to dine with her, and that she was to treat
him as she would himself. Camilla was distressed, as a discreet and
right-minded woman would be, at the orders her husband left her, and
bade him re