 I came upon a fair damsel in man’s
    clothes, and a brother of hers dressed as a woman; my head-carver
    has fallen in love with the girl, and has in his own mind chosen
    her for a wife, so he says, and I have chosen the youth for a
    son-in-law; to-day we are going to explain our intentions to the
    father of the pair, who is one Diego de la Llana, a gentleman and
    an old Christian as much as you please.
    I have visited the market-places, as your worship advises me, and
    yesterday I found a stall-keeper selling new hazel nuts and proved
    her to have mixed a bushel of old empty rotten nuts with a bushel
    of new; I confiscated the whole for the children of the
    charity-school, who will know how to distinguish them well enough,
    and I sentenced her not to come into the market-place for a
    fortnight; they told me I did bravely. I can tell your worship it
    is commonly said in this town that there are no people worse than
    the market-women, for they are all barefaced, unconscionable, and
    impudent, and I can well believe it from what I have seen of them
    in other towns.
    I am very glad my lady the duchess has written to my wife Teresa
    Panza and sent her the present your worship speaks of; and I will
    strive to show myself grateful when the time comes; kiss her hands
    for me, and tell her I say she has not thrown it into a sack with a
    hole in it, as she will see in the end. I should not like your
    worship to have any difference with my lord and lady; for if you
    fall out with them it is plain it must do me harm; and as you give
    me advice to be grateful it will not do for your worship not to be
    so yourself to those who have shown you such kindness, and by whom
    you have been treated so hospitably in their castle.
    That about the scratching I don’t understand; but I suppose it must
    be one of the ill-turns the wicked enchanters are always doing your
    worship; when we meet I shall know all about it. I wish I could
    send your worship something; but I don’t know what to send, unless
    it be some very curious clyster pipes, to work with bladders, that
    they make in this island; but if the office remains with me I’ll
    find out something to send, one way or another. If my wife Teresa
    Panza writes to me, pay the postage and send me the letter, for I
    have a very great desire to hear how my house and wife and children
    are going on. And so, may God deliver your worship from evil-minded
    enchanters, and bring me well and peacefully out of this
    government, which I doubt, for I expect to take leave of it and my
    life together, from the way Doctor Pedro Recio treats me.


Your worship’s servant
SANCHO PANZA THE GOVERNOR.


The secretary sealed the letter, and immediately dismissed the courier;
and those who were carrying on the joke against Sancho putting their
heads together arranged how he was to be dismissed from the government.
Sancho spent the afternoon in drawing up certain ordinances relating to
the good government of what he fancied the island; and he ordained that
there were to be no provision hucksters in the State, and that men
might import wine into it from any place they pleased, provided they
declared the quarter it came from, so that a price might be put upon it
according to its quality, reputation, and the estimation it was held
in; and he that watered his wine, or changed the name, was to forfeit
his life for it. He reduced the prices of all manner of shoes, boots,
and stockings, but of shoes in particular, as they seemed to him to run
extravagantly high. He established a fixed rate for servants’ wages,
which were becoming recklessly exorbitant. He laid extremely heavy
penalties upon those who sang lewd or loose songs either by day or
night. He decreed that no blind man should sing of any miracle in
verse, unless he could produce authentic evidence