 will not press thee, Sancho,” said Ricote; “but tell me, wert thou
in our village when my wife and daughter and brother-in-law left it?”

“I was so,” said Sancho; “and I can tell thee thy daughter left it
looking so lovely that all the village turned out to see her, and
everybody said she was the fairest creature in the world. She wept as
she went, and embraced all her friends and acquaintances and those who
came out to see her, and she begged them all to commend her to God and
Our Lady his mother, and this in such a touching way that it made me
weep myself, though I’m not much given to tears commonly; and, faith,
many a one would have liked to hide her, or go out and carry her off on
the road; but the fear of going against the king’s command kept them
back. The one who showed himself most moved was Don Pedro Gregorio, the
rich young heir thou knowest of, and they say he was deep in love with
her; and since she left he has not been seen in our village again, and
we all suspect he has gone after her to steal her away, but so far
nothing has been heard of it.”

“I always had a suspicion that gentleman had a passion for my
daughter,” said Ricote; “but as I felt sure of my Ricota’s virtue it
gave me no uneasiness to know that he loved her; for thou must have
heard it said, Sancho, that the Morisco women seldom or never engage in
amours with the old Christians; and my daughter, who I fancy thought
more of being a Christian than of lovemaking, would not trouble herself
about the attentions of this heir.”

“God grant it,” said Sancho, “for it would be a bad business for both
of them; but now let me be off, friend Ricote, for I want to reach
where my master Don Quixote is to-night.”

“God be with thee, brother Sancho,” said Ricote; “my comrades are
beginning to stir, and it is time, too, for us to continue our
journey;” and then they both embraced, and Sancho mounted Dapple, and
Ricote leant upon his staff, and so they parted.



p54e.jpg (40K)



CHAPTER LV.
OF WHAT BEFELL SANCHO ON THE ROAD, AND OTHER THINGS THAT CANNOT BE
SURPASSED




p55a.jpg (126K)

Full Size



The length of time he delayed with Ricote prevented Sancho from
reaching the duke’s castle that day, though he was within half a league
of it when night, somewhat dark and cloudy, overtook him. This,
however, as it was summer time, did not give him much uneasiness, and
he turned aside out of the road intending to wait for morning; but his
ill luck and hard fate so willed it that as he was searching about for
a place to make himself as comfortable as possible, he and Dapple fell
into a deep dark hole that lay among some very old buildings. As he
fell he commended himself with all his heart to God, fancying he was
not going to stop until he reached the depths of the bottomless pit;
but it did not turn out so, for at little more than thrice a man’s
height Dapple touched bottom, and he found himself sitting on him
without having received any hurt or damage whatever. He felt himself
all over and held his breath to try whether he was quite sound or had a
hole made in him anywhere, and finding himself all right and whole and
in perfect health he was profuse in his thanks to God our Lord for the
mercy that had been shown him, for he made sure he had been broken into
a thousand pieces. He also felt along the sides of the pit with his
hands to see if it were possible to get out of it without help, but he
found they were quite smooth and afforded no hold anywhere, at which he
was greatly distressed, especially when he heard how pathetically and
dolefully Dapple was bemoaning himself, and no wonder he complained,
nor was it from ill-temper, for in truth he was not in a very good
case. “Alas,” said Sancho, “what unexpected accidents happen at every
step to those who live in this miserable world! Who would have said
that one who saw himself yesterday sitting on a throne, governor of an
island, giving orde