imself a target for all that musketry, and
struggles to cross that narrow path to the enemy’s ship. And what is
still more marvellous, no sooner has one gone down into the depths he
will never rise from till the end of the world, than another takes his
place; and if he too falls into the sea that waits for him like an
enemy, another and another will succeed him without a moment’s pause
between their deaths: courage and daring the greatest that all the
chances of war can show. Happy the blest ages that knew not the dread
fury of those devilish engines of artillery, whose inventor I am
persuaded is in hell receiving the reward of his diabolical invention,
by which he made it easy for a base and cowardly arm to take the life
of a gallant gentleman; and that, when he knows not how or whence, in
the height of the ardour and enthusiasm that fire and animate brave
hearts, there should come some random bullet, discharged perhaps by one
who fled in terror at the flash when he fired off his accursed machine,
which in an instant puts an end to the projects and cuts off the life
of one who deserved to live for ages to come. And thus when I reflect
on this, I am almost tempted to say that in my heart I repent of having
adopted this profession of knight-errant in so detestable an age as we
live in now; for though no peril can make me fear, still it gives me
some uneasiness to think that powder and lead may rob me of the
opportunity of making myself famous and renowned throughout the known
earth by the might of my arm and the edge of my sword. But Heaven’s
will be done; if I succeed in my attempt I shall be all the more
honoured, as I have faced greater dangers than the knights-errant of
yore exposed themselves to.”

All this lengthy discourse Don Quixote delivered while the others
supped, forgetting to raise a morsel to his lips, though Sancho more
than once told him to eat his supper, as he would have time enough
afterwards to say all he wanted. It excited fresh pity in those who had
heard him to see a man of apparently sound sense, and with rational
views on every subject he discussed, so hopelessly wanting in all, when
his wretched unlucky chivalry was in question. The curate told him he
was quite right in all he had said in favour of arms, and that he
himself, though a man of letters and a graduate, was of the same
opinion.

They finished their supper, the cloth was removed, and while the
hostess, her daughter, and Maritornes were getting Don Quixote of La
Mancha’s garret ready, in which it was arranged that the women were to
be quartered by themselves for the night, Don Fernando begged the
captive to tell them the story of his life, for it could not fail to be
strange and interesting, to judge by the hints he had let fall on his
arrival in company with Zoraida. To this the captive replied that he
would very willingly yield to his request, only he feared his tale
would not give them as much pleasure as he wished; nevertheless, not to
be wanting in compliance, he would tell it. The curate and the others
thanked him and added their entreaties, and he finding himself so
pressed said there was no occasion to ask, where a command had such
weight, and added, “If your worships will give me your attention you
will hear a true story which, perhaps, fictitious ones constructed with
ingenious and studied art cannot come up to.” These words made them
settle themselves in their places and preserve a deep silence, and he
seeing them waiting on his words in mute expectation, began thus in a
pleasant quiet voice.



c38e.jpg (18K)



CHAPTER XXXIX.
WHEREIN THE CAPTIVE RELATES HIS LIFE AND ADVENTURES




c39a.jpg (137K)

Full Size




My family had its origin in a village in the mountains of Leon, and
nature had been kinder and more generous to it than fortune; though in
the general poverty of those communities my father passed for being
even a rich man; and he would have bee