 plunged it into her left side high up close to the
shoulder, and then allowed herself to fall to the ground as if in a
faint.

Leonela and Lothario stood amazed and astounded at the catastrophe, and
seeing Camilla stretched on the ground and bathed in her blood they
were still uncertain as to the true nature of the act. Lothario,
terrified and breathless, ran in haste to pluck out the dagger; but
when he saw how slight the wound was he was relieved of his fears and
once more admired the subtlety, coolness, and ready wit of the fair
Camilla; and the better to support the part he had to play he began to
utter profuse and doleful lamentations over her body as if she were
dead, invoking maledictions not only on himself but also on him who had
been the means of placing him in such a position: and knowing that his
friend Anselmo heard him he spoke in such a way as to make a listener
feel much more pity for him than for Camilla, even though he supposed
her dead. Leonela took her up in her arms and laid her on the bed,
entreating Lothario to go in quest of someone to attend to her wound in
secret, and at the same time asking his advice and opinion as to what
they should say to Anselmo about his lady’s wound if he should chance
to return before it was healed. He replied they might say what they
liked, for he was not in a state to give advice that would be of any
use; all he could tell her was to try and stanch the blood, as he was
going where he should never more be seen; and with every appearance of
deep grief and sorrow he left the house; but when he found himself
alone, and where there was nobody to see him, he crossed himself
unceasingly, lost in wonder at the adroitness of Camilla and the
consistent acting of Leonela. He reflected how convinced Anselmo would
be that he had a second Portia for a wife, and he looked forward
anxiously to meeting him in order to rejoice together over falsehood
and truth the most craftily veiled that could be imagined.

Leonela, as he told her, stanched her lady’s blood, which was no more
than sufficed to support her deception; and washing the wound with a
little wine she bound it up to the best of her skill, talking all the
time she was tending her in a strain that, even if nothing else had
been said before, would have been enough to assure Anselmo that he had
in Camilla a model of purity. To Leonela’s words Camilla added her own,
calling herself cowardly and wanting in spirit, since she had not
enough at the time she had most need of it to rid herself of the life
she so much loathed. She asked her attendant’s advice as to whether or
not she ought to inform her beloved husband of all that had happened,
but the other bade her say nothing about it, as she would lay upon him
the obligation of taking vengeance on Lothario, which he could not do
but at great risk to himself; and it was the duty of a true wife not to
give her husband provocation to quarrel, but, on the contrary, to
remove it as far as possible from him.

Camilla replied that she believed she was right and that she would
follow her advice, but at any rate it would be well to consider how she
was to explain the wound to Anselmo, for he could not help seeing it;
to which Leonela answered that she did not know how to tell a lie even
in jest.

“How then can I know, my dear?” said Camilla, “for I should not dare to
forge or keep up a falsehood if my life depended on it. If we can think
of no escape from this difficulty, it will be better to tell him the
plain truth than that he should find us out in an untrue story.”

“Be not uneasy, señora,” said Leonela; “between this and to-morrow I
will think of what we must say to him, and perhaps the wound being
where it is it can be hidden from his sight, and Heaven will be pleased
to aid us in a purpose so good and honourable. Compose yourself,
señora, and endeavour to calm your excitement lest my lord find you
agitated; and leave the rest t