 name, then, señor,” replied Don Quixote; “if that be so, I
would have you know that I am held enchanted in this cage by the envy
and fraud of wicked enchanters; for virtue is more persecuted by the
wicked than loved by the good. I am a knight-errant, and not one of
those whose names Fame has never thought of immortalising in her
record, but of those who, in defiance and in spite of envy itself, and
all the magicians that Persia, or Brahmans that India, or Gymnosophists
that Ethiopia ever produced, will place their names in the temple of
immortality, to serve as examples and patterns for ages to come,
whereby knights-errant may see the footsteps in which they must tread
if they would attain the summit and crowning point of honour in arms.”

“What Señor Don Quixote of La Mancha says,” observed the curate, “is
the truth; for he goes enchanted in this cart, not from any fault or
sins of his, but because of the malevolence of those to whom virtue is
odious and valour hateful. This, señor, is the Knight of the Rueful
Countenance, if you have ever heard him named, whose valiant
achievements and mighty deeds shall be written on lasting brass and
imperishable marble, notwithstanding all the efforts of envy to obscure
them and malice to hide them.”

When the canon heard both the prisoner and the man who was at liberty
talk in such a strain he was ready to cross himself in his
astonishment, and could not make out what had befallen him; and all his
attendants were in the same state of amazement.

At this point Sancho Panza, who had drawn near to hear the
conversation, said, in order to make everything plain, “Well, sirs, you
may like or dislike what I am going to say, but the fact of the matter
is, my master, Don Quixote, is just as much enchanted as my mother. He
is in his full senses, he eats and he drinks, and he has his calls like
other men and as he had yesterday, before they caged him. And if that’s
the case, what do they mean by wanting me to believe that he is
enchanted? For I have heard many a one say that enchanted people
neither eat, nor sleep, nor talk; and my master, if you don’t stop him,
will talk more than thirty lawyers.” Then turning to the curate he
exclaimed, “Ah, señor curate, señor curate! do you think I don’t know
you? Do you think I don’t guess and see the drift of these new
enchantments? Well then, I can tell you I know you, for all your face
is covered, and I can tell you I am up to you, however you may hide
your tricks. After all, where envy reigns virtue cannot live, and where
there is niggardliness there can be no liberality. Ill betide the
devil! if it had not been for your worship my master would be married
to the Princess Micomicona this minute, and I should be a count at
least; for no less was to be expected, as well from the goodness of my
master, him of the Rueful Countenance, as from the greatness of my
services. But I see now how true it is what they say in these parts,
that the wheel of fortune turns faster than a mill-wheel, and that
those who were up yesterday are down to-day. I am sorry for my wife and
children, for when they might fairly and reasonably expect to see their
father return to them a governor or viceroy of some island or kingdom,
they will see him come back a horse-boy. I have said all this, señor
curate, only to urge your paternity to lay to your conscience your
ill-treatment of my master; and have a care that God does not call you
to account in another life for making a prisoner of him in this way,
and charge against you all the succours and good deeds that my lord Don
Quixote leaves undone while he is shut up.

“Trim those lamps there!” exclaimed the barber at this; “so you are of
the same fraternity as your master, too, Sancho? By God, I begin to see
that you will have to keep him company in the cage, and be enchanted
like him for having caught some of his humour and chivalry. It was an
evil hour when you let yourself b