pitch me into a well; I
should not mind it much, if I’m to be always made the cow of the
wedding for the cure of other people’s ailments. Leave me alone; or
else by God I’ll fling the whole thing to the dogs, let come what may.”

Altisidora had by this time sat up on the catafalque, and as she did so
the clarions sounded, accompanied by the flutes, and the voices of all
present exclaiming, “Long life to Altisidora! long life to Altisidora!”
The duke and duchess and the kings Minos and Rhadamanthus stood up, and
all, together with Don Quixote and Sancho, advanced to receive her and
take her down from the catafalque; and she, making as though she were
recovering from a swoon, bowed her head to the duke and duchess and to
the kings, and looking sideways at Don Quixote, said to him, “God
forgive thee, insensible knight, for through thy cruelty I have been,
to me it seems, more than a thousand years in the other world; and to
thee, the most compassionate upon earth, I render thanks for the life I
am now in possession of. From this day forth, friend Sancho, count as
thine six smocks of mine which I bestow upon thee, to make as many
shirts for thyself, and if they are not all quite whole, at any rate
they are all clean.”

Sancho kissed her hands in gratitude, kneeling, and with the mitre in
his hand. The duke bade them take it from him, and give him back his
cap and doublet and remove the flaming robe. Sancho begged the duke to
let them leave him the robe and mitre; as he wanted to take them home
for a token and memento of that unexampled adventure. The duchess said
they must leave them with him; for he knew already what a great friend
of his she was. The duke then gave orders that the court should be
cleared, and that all should retire to their chambers, and that Don
Quixote and Sancho should be conducted to their old quarters.



p69e.jpg (60K)



CHAPTER LXX.
WHICH FOLLOWS SIXTY-NINE AND DEALS WITH MATTERS INDISPENSABLE FOR THE
CLEAR COMPREHENSION OF THIS HISTORY




p70a.jpg (131K)

Full Size



Sancho slept that night in a cot in the same chamber with Don Quixote,
a thing he would have gladly excused if he could for he knew very well
that with questions and answers his master would not let him sleep, and
he was in no humour for talking much, as he still felt the pain of his
late martyrdom, which interfered with his freedom of speech; and it
would have been more to his taste to sleep in a hovel alone, than in
that luxurious chamber in company. And so well founded did his
apprehension prove, and so correct was his anticipation, that scarcely
had his master got into bed when he said, “What dost thou think of
to-night’s adventure, Sancho? Great and mighty is the power of
cold-hearted scorn, for thou with thine own eyes hast seen Altisidora
slain, not by arrows, nor by the sword, nor by any warlike weapon, nor
by deadly poisons, but by the thought of the sternness and scorn with
which I have always treated her.”

“She might have died and welcome,” said Sancho, “when she pleased and
how she pleased; and she might have left me alone, for I never made her
fall in love or scorned her. I don’t know nor can I imagine how the
recovery of Altisidora, a damsel more fanciful than wise, can have, as
I have said before, anything to do with the sufferings of Sancho Panza.
Now I begin to see plainly and clearly that there are enchanters and
enchanted people in the world; and may God deliver me from them, since
I can’t deliver myself; and so I beg of your worship to let me sleep
and not ask me any more questions, unless you want me to throw myself
out of the window.”

“Sleep, Sancho my friend,” said Don Quixote, “if the pinprodding and
pinches thou hast received and the smacks administered to thee will let
thee.”

“No pain came up to the insult of the smacks,” said Sancho, “for the
simple reason that it was duennas, confound them, that gave them to me;
but once more I