hermen, the owners of the boat, which
the mill-wheels had knocked to pieces, now came up, and seeing it
smashed they proceeded to strip Sancho and to demand payment for it
from Don Quixote; but he with great calmness, just as if nothing had
happened him, told the millers and fishermen that he would pay for the
bark most cheerfully, on condition that they delivered up to him, free
and unhurt, the person or persons that were in durance in that castle
of theirs.



p29b.jpg (314K)

Full Size



“What persons or what castle art thou talking of, madman? Art thou for
carrying off the people who come to grind corn in these mills?”

“That’s enough,” said Don Quixote to himself, “it would be preaching in
the desert to attempt by entreaties to induce this rabble to do any
virtuous action. In this adventure two mighty enchanters must have
encountered one another, and one frustrates what the other attempts;
one provided the bark for me, and the other upset me; God help us, this
world is all machinations and schemes at cross purposes one with the
other. I can do no more.” And then turning towards the mills he said
aloud, “Friends, whoe’er ye be that are immured in that prison, forgive
me that, to my misfortune and yours, I cannot deliver you from your
misery; this adventure is doubtless reserved and destined for some
other knight.”

So saying he settled with the fishermen, and paid fifty reals for the
boat, which Sancho handed to them very much against the grain, saying,
“With a couple more bark businesses like this we shall have sunk our
whole capital.”

The fishermen and the millers stood staring in amazement at the two
figures, so very different to all appearance from ordinary men, and
were wholly unable to make out the drift of the observations and
questions Don Quixote addressed to them; and coming to the conclusion
that they were madmen, they left them and betook themselves, the
millers to their mills, and the fishermen to their huts. Don Quixote
and Sancho returned to their beasts, and to their life of beasts, and
so ended the adventure of the enchanted bark.



p29e.jpg (54K)



CHAPTER XXX.
OF DON QUIXOTE’S ADVENTURE WITH A FAIR HUNTRESS




p30a.jpg (134K)

Full Size



They reached their beasts in low spirits and bad humour enough, knight
and squire, Sancho particularly, for with him what touched the stock of
money touched his heart, and when any was taken from him he felt as if
he was robbed of the apples of his eyes. In fine, without exchanging a
word, they mounted and quitted the famous river, Don Quixote absorbed
in thoughts of his love, Sancho in thinking of his advancement, which
just then, it seemed to him, he was very far from securing; for, fool
as he was, he saw clearly enough that his master’s acts were all or
most of them utterly senseless; and he began to cast about for an
opportunity of retiring from his service and going home some day,
without entering into any explanations or taking any farewell of him.
Fortune, however, ordered matters after a fashion very much the
opposite of what he contemplated.

It so happened that the next day towards sunset, on coming out of a
wood, Don Quixote cast his eyes over a green meadow, and at the far end
of it observed some people, and as he drew nearer saw that it was a
hawking party. Coming closer, he distinguished among them a lady of
graceful mien, on a pure white palfrey or hackney caparisoned with
green trappings and a silver-mounted side-saddle. The lady was also in
green, and so richly and splendidly dressed that splendour itself
seemed personified in her. On her left hand she bore a hawk, a proof to
Don Quixote’s mind that she must be some great lady and the mistress of
the whole hunting party, which was the fact; so he said to Sancho, “Run
Sancho, my son, and say to that lady on the palfrey with the hawk that
I, the Knight of the Lions, kiss the hands of her exalted beauty, and
if 