the sun, veiled in clouds, with
subdued light and tempered beams, enabled Don Quixote to relate,
without heat or inconvenience, what he had seen in the cave of
Montesinos to his two illustrious hearers, and he began as follows:

“A matter of some twelve or fourteen times a man’s height down in this
pit, on the right-hand side, there is a recess or space, roomy enough
to contain a large cart with its mules. A little light reaches it
through some chinks or crevices, communicating with it and open to the
surface of the earth. This recess or space I perceived when I was
already growing weary and disgusted at finding myself hanging suspended
by the rope, travelling downwards into that dark region without any
certainty or knowledge of where I was going, so I resolved to enter it
and rest myself for a while. I called out, telling you not to let out
more rope until I bade you, but you cannot have heard me. I then
gathered in the rope you were sending me, and making a coil or pile of
it I seated myself upon it, ruminating and considering what I was to do
to lower myself to the bottom, having no one to hold me up; and as I
was thus deep in thought and perplexity, suddenly and without
provocation a profound sleep fell upon me, and when I least expected
it, I know not how, I awoke and found myself in the midst of the most
beautiful, delightful meadow that nature could produce or the most
lively human imagination conceive. I opened my eyes, I rubbed them, and
found I was not asleep but thoroughly awake. Nevertheless, I felt my
head and breast to satisfy myself whether it was I myself who was there
or some empty delusive phantom; but touch, feeling, the collected
thoughts that passed through my mind, all convinced me that I was the
same then and there that I am this moment. Next there presented itself
to my sight a stately royal palace or castle, with walls that seemed
built of clear transparent crystal; and through two great doors that
opened wide therein, I saw coming forth and advancing towards me a
venerable old man, clad in a long gown of mulberry-coloured serge that
trailed upon the ground. On his shoulders and breast he had a green
satin collegiate hood, and covering his head a black Milanese bonnet,
and his snow-white beard fell below his girdle. He carried no arms
whatever, nothing but a rosary of beads bigger than fair-sized
filberts, each tenth bead being like a moderate ostrich egg; his
bearing, his gait, his dignity and imposing presence held me spellbound
and wondering. He approached me, and the first thing he did was to
embrace me closely, and then he said to me, ‘For a long time now, O
valiant knight Don Quixote of La Mancha, we who are here enchanted in
these solitudes have been hoping to see thee, that thou mayest make
known to the world what is shut up and concealed in this deep cave,
called the cave of Montesinos, which thou hast entered, an achievement
reserved for thy invincible heart and stupendous courage alone to
attempt. Come with me, illustrious sir, and I will show thee the
marvels hidden within this transparent castle, whereof I am the alcaide
and perpetual warden; for I am Montesinos himself, from whom the cave
takes its name.’

“The instant he told me he was Montesinos, I asked him if the story
they told in the world above here was true, that he had taken out the
heart of his great friend Durandarte from his breast with a little
dagger, and carried it to the lady Belerma, as his friend when at the
point of death had commanded him. He said in reply that they spoke the
truth in every respect except as to the dagger, for it was not a
dagger, nor little, but a burnished poniard sharper than an awl.”

“That poniard must have been made by Ramon de Hoces the Sevillian,”
said Sancho.

“I do not know,” said Don Quixote; “it could not have been by that
poniard maker, however, because Ramon de Hoces was a man of yesterday,
and the affair of Roncesvalles, wher