ire!”

To which, with great composure and pretended innocence, Sancho replied,
“If they are curds let me have them, your worship, and I’ll eat them;
but let the devil eat them, for it must have been he who put them
there. I dare to dirty your helmet! You have guessed the offender
finely! Faith, sir, by the light God gives me, it seems I must have
enchanters too, that persecute me as a creature and limb of your
worship, and they must have put that nastiness there in order to
provoke your patience to anger, and make you baste my ribs as you are
wont to do. Well, this time, indeed, they have missed their aim, for I
trust to my master’s good sense to see that I have got no curds or
milk, or anything of the sort; and that if I had it is in my stomach I
would put it and not in the helmet.”

“May be so,” said Don Quixote. All this the gentleman was observing,
and with astonishment, more especially when, after having wiped himself
clean, his head, face, beard, and helmet, Don Quixote put it on, and
settling himself firmly in his stirrups, easing his sword in the
scabbard, and grasping his lance, he cried, “Now, come who will, here
am I, ready to try conclusions with Satan himself in person!”

By this time the cart with the flags had come up, unattended by anyone
except the carter on a mule, and a man sitting in front. Don Quixote
planted himself before it and said, “Whither are you going, brothers?
What cart is this? What have you got in it? What flags are those?”

To this the carter replied, “The cart is mine; what is in it is a pair
of wild caged lions, which the governor of Oran is sending to court as
a present to his Majesty; and the flags are our lord the King’s, to
show that what is here is his property.”

“And are the lions large?” asked Don Quixote.

“So large,” replied the man who sat at the door of the cart, “that
larger, or as large, have never crossed from Africa to Spain; I am the
keeper, and I have brought over others, but never any like these. They
are male and female; the male is in that first cage and the female in
the one behind, and they are hungry now, for they have eaten nothing
to-day, so let your worship stand aside, for we must make haste to the
place where we are to feed them.”

Hereupon, smiling slightly, Don Quixote exclaimed, “Lion-whelps to me!
to me whelps of lions, and at such a time! Then, by God! those
gentlemen who send them here shall see if I am a man to be frightened
by lions. Get down, my good fellow, and as you are the keeper open the
cages, and turn me out those beasts, and in the midst of this plain I
will let them know who Don Quixote of La Mancha is, in spite and in the
teeth of the enchanters who send them to me.”

“So, so,” said the gentleman to himself at this; “our worthy knight has
shown of what sort he is; the curds, no doubt, have softened his skull
and brought his brains to a head.”

At this instant Sancho came up to him, saying, “Señor, for God’s sake
do something to keep my master, Don Quixote, from tackling these lions;
for if he does they’ll tear us all to pieces here.”

“Is your master then so mad,” asked the gentleman, “that you believe
and are afraid he will engage such fierce animals?”

“He is not mad,” said Sancho, “but he is venturesome.”

“I will prevent it,” said the gentleman; and going over to Don Quixote,
who was insisting upon the keeper’s opening the cages, he said to him,
“Sir knight, knights-errant should attempt adventures which encourage
the hope of a successful issue, not those which entirely withhold it;
for valour that trenches upon temerity savours rather of madness than
of courage; moreover, these lions do not come to oppose you, nor do
they dream of such a thing; they are going as presents to his Majesty,
and it will not be right to stop them or delay their journey.”

“Gentle sir,” replied Don Quixote, “you go and mind your tame partridge
and your bold ferret, and leave everyone to mana