 to rest for the remainder of it. Don
Quixote offered to mount guard over the castle lest they should be
attacked by some giant or other malevolent scoundrel, covetous of the
great treasure of beauty the castle contained. Those who understood him
returned him thanks for this service, and they gave the Judge an
account of his extraordinary humour, with which he was not a little
amused. Sancho Panza alone was fuming at the lateness of the hour for
retiring to rest; and he of all was the one that made himself most
comfortable, as he stretched himself on the trappings of his ass,
which, as will be told farther on, cost him so dear.

The ladies, then, having retired to their chamber, and the others
having disposed themselves with as little discomfort as they could, Don
Quixote sallied out of the inn to act as sentinel of the castle as he
had promised. It happened, however, that a little before the approach
of dawn a voice so musical and sweet reached the ears of the ladies
that it forced them all to listen attentively, but especially Dorothea,
who had been awake, and by whose side Doña Clara de Viedma, for so the
Judge’s daughter was called, lay sleeping. No one could imagine who it
was that sang so sweetly, and the voice was unaccompanied by any
instrument. At one moment it seemed to them as if the singer were in
the courtyard, at another in the stable; and as they were all
attention, wondering, Cardenio came to the door and said, “Listen,
whoever is not asleep, and you will hear a muleteer’s voice that
enchants as it chants.”

“We are listening to it already, señor,” said Dorothea; on which
Cardenio went away; and Dorothea, giving all her attention to it, made
out the words of the song to be these:



c42e.jpg (11K)



CHAPTER XLIII.
WHEREIN IS RELATED THE PLEASANT STORY OF THE MULETEER, TOGETHER WITH
OTHER STRANGE THINGS THAT CAME TO PASS IN THE INN




c43a.jpg (127K)

Full Size




Ah me, Love’s mariner am I
On Love’s deep ocean sailing;
I know not where the haven lies,
I dare not hope to gain it.

One solitary distant star
Is all I have to guide me,
A brighter orb than those of old
That Palinurus lighted.

And vaguely drifting am I borne,
I know not where it leads me;
I fix my gaze on it alone,
Of all beside it heedless.

But over-cautious prudery,
And coyness cold and cruel,
When most I need it, these, like clouds,
Its longed-for light refuse me.

Bright star, goal of my yearning eyes
As thou above me beamest,
When thou shalt hide thee from my sight
I’ll know that death is near me.


The singer had got so far when it struck Dorothea that it was not fair
to let Clara miss hearing such a sweet voice, so, shaking her from side
to side, she woke her, saying:

“Forgive me, child, for waking thee, but I do so that thou mayest have
the pleasure of hearing the best voice thou hast ever heard, perhaps,
in all thy life.”

Clara awoke quite drowsy, and not understanding at the moment what
Dorothea said, asked her what it was; she repeated what she had said,
and Clara became attentive at once; but she had hardly heard two lines,
as the singer continued, when a strange trembling seized her, as if she
were suffering from a severe attack of quartan ague, and throwing her
arms round Dorothea she said:

“Ah, dear lady of my soul and life! why did you wake me? The greatest
kindness fortune could do me now would be to close my eyes and ears so
as neither to see or hear that unhappy musician.”

“What art thou talking about, child?” said Dorothea. “Why, they say
this singer is a muleteer!”

“Nay, he is the lord of many places,” replied Clara, “and that one in
my heart which he holds so firmly shall never be taken from him, unless
he be willing to surrender it.”

Dorothea was amazed at the ardent language of the girl, for it seemed
to be far beyond such experience of life as her tender years gave any
promise of, so she said to her:

“You spea