e, thou glutton,” said Don Quixote; “come, let us go and
witness this bridal, and see what the rejected Basilio does.”

“Let him do what he likes,” returned Sancho; “be he not poor, he would
marry Quiteria. To make a grand match for himself, and he without a
farthing; is there nothing else? Faith, señor, it’s my opinion the poor
man should be content with what he can get, and not go looking for
dainties in the bottom of the sea. I will bet my arm that Camacho could
bury Basilio in reals; and if that be so, as no doubt it is, what a
fool Quiteria would be to refuse the fine dresses and jewels Camacho
must have given her and will give her, and take Basilio’s bar-throwing
and sword-play. They won’t give a pint of wine at the tavern for a good
cast of the bar or a neat thrust of the sword. Talents and
accomplishments that can’t be turned into money, let Count Dirlos have
them; but when such gifts fall to one that has hard cash, I wish my
condition of life was as becoming as they are. On a good foundation you
can raise a good building, and the best foundation in the world is
money.”

“For God’s sake, Sancho,” said Don Quixote here, “stop that harangue;
it is my belief, if thou wert allowed to continue all thou beginnest
every instant, thou wouldst have no time left for eating or sleeping;
for thou wouldst spend it all in talking.”

“If your worship had a good memory,” replied Sancho, “you would
remember the articles of our agreement before we started from home this
last time; one of them was that I was to be let say all I liked, so
long as it was not against my neighbour or your worship’s authority;
and so far, it seems to me, I have not broken the said article.”

“I remember no such article, Sancho,” said Don Quixote; “and even if it
were so, I desire you to hold your tongue and come along; for the
instruments we heard last night are already beginning to enliven the
valleys again, and no doubt the marriage will take place in the cool of
the morning, and not in the heat of the afternoon.”

Sancho did as his master bade him, and putting the saddle on Rocinante
and the pack-saddle on Dapple, they both mounted and at a leisurely
pace entered the arcade. The first thing that presented itself to
Sancho’s eyes was a whole ox spitted on a whole elm tree, and in the
fire at which it was to be roasted there was burning a middling-sized
mountain of faggots, and six stewpots that stood round the blaze had
not been made in the ordinary mould of common pots, for they were six
half wine-jars, each fit to hold the contents of a slaughter-house;
they swallowed up whole sheep and hid them away in their insides
without showing any more sign of them than if they were pigeons.
Countless were the hares ready skinned and the plucked fowls that hung
on the trees for burial in the pots, numberless the wildfowl and game
of various sorts suspended from the branches that the air might keep
them cool. Sancho counted more than sixty wine skins of over six
gallons each, and all filled, as it proved afterwards, with generous
wines. There were, besides, piles of the whitest bread, like the heaps
of corn one sees on the threshing-floors. There was a wall made of
cheeses arranged like open brick-work, and two cauldrons full of oil,
bigger than those of a dyer’s shop, served for cooking fritters, which
when fried were taken out with two mighty shovels, and plunged into
another cauldron of prepared honey that stood close by. Of cooks and
cook-maids there were over fifty, all clean, brisk, and blithe. In the
capacious belly of the ox were a dozen soft little sucking-pigs, which,
sewn up there, served to give it tenderness and flavour. The spices of
different kinds did not seem to have been bought by the pound but by
the quarter, and all lay open to view in a great chest. In short, all
the preparations made for the wedding were in rustic style, but
abundant enough to feed an army.



p20c.jpg (415K)

