raduate
of Osuna, get out of my presence at once; or I swear by the sun I’ll
take a cudgel, and by dint of blows, beginning with him, I’ll not leave
a doctor in the whole island; at least of those I know to be ignorant;
for as to learned, wise, sensible physicians, them I will reverence and
honour as divine persons. Once more I say let Pedro Recio get out of
this or I’ll take this chair I am sitting on and break it over his
head. And if they call me to account for it, I’ll clear myself by
saying I served God in killing a bad doctor—a general executioner. And
now give me something to eat, or else take your government; for a trade
that does not feed its master is not worth two beans.”

The doctor was dismayed when he saw the governor in such a passion, and
he would have made a Tirteafuera out of the room but that the same
instant a post-horn sounded in the street; and the carver putting his
head out of the window turned round and said, “It’s a courier from my
lord the duke, no doubt with some despatch of importance.”

The courier came in all sweating and flurried, and taking a paper from
his bosom, placed it in the governor’s hands. Sancho handed it to the
majordomo and bade him read the superscription, which ran thus:

_To Don Sancho Panza, Governor of the Island of Barataria, into his own
hands or those of his secretary._

Sancho when he heard this said, “Which of you is my secretary?” “I am,
señor,” said one of those present, “for I can read and write, and am a
Biscayan.” “With that addition,” said Sancho, “you might be secretary
to the emperor himself; open this paper and see what it says.” The
new-born secretary obeyed, and having read the contents said the matter
was one to be discussed in private. Sancho ordered the chamber to be
cleared, the majordomo and the carver only remaining; so the doctor and
the others withdrew, and then the secretary read the letter, which was
as follows:

It has come to my knowledge, Señor Don Sancho Panza, that certain
enemies of mine and of the island are about to make a furious attack
upon it some night, I know not when. It behoves you to be on the alert
and keep watch, that they surprise you not. I also know by trustworthy
spies that four persons have entered the town in disguise in order to
take your life, because they stand in dread of your great capacity;
keep your eyes open and take heed who approaches you to address you,
and eat nothing that is presented to you. I will take care to send you
aid if you find yourself in difficulty, but in all things you will act
as may be expected of your judgment. From this place, the Sixteenth of
August, at four in the morning.


Your friend,
THE DUKE


Sancho was astonished, and those who stood by made believe to be so
too, and turning to the majordomo he said to him, “What we have got to
do first, and it must be done at once, is to put Doctor Recio in the
lock-up; for if anyone wants to kill me it is he, and by a slow death
and the worst of all, which is hunger.”

“Likewise,” said the carver, “it is my opinion your worship should not
eat anything that is on this table, for the whole was a present from
some nuns; and as they say, ‘behind the cross there’s the devil.’”

“I don’t deny it,” said Sancho; “so for the present give me a piece of
bread and four pounds or so of grapes; no poison can come in them; for
the fact is I can’t go on without eating; and if we are to be prepared
for these battles that are threatening us we must be well provisioned;
for it is the tripes that carry the heart and not the heart the tripes.
And you, secretary, answer my lord the duke and tell him that all his
commands shall be obeyed to the letter, as he directs; and say from me
to my lady the duchess that I kiss her hands, and that I beg of her not
to forget to send my letter and bundle to my wife Teresa Panza by a
messenger; and I will take it as a great favour and will not fail to
serve her in all th