all I want with
him he knows as much and more philosophy than Aristotle.’ In the same
way, Sancho, for all I want with Dulcinea del Toboso she is just as
good as the most exalted princess on earth. It is not to be supposed
that all those poets who sang the praises of ladies under the fancy
names they give them, had any such mistresses. Thinkest thou that the
Amarillises, the Phillises, the Sylvias, the Dianas, the Galateas, the
Fílidas, and all the rest of them, that the books, the ballads, the
barber’s shops, the theatres are full of, were really and truly ladies
of flesh and blood, and mistresses of those that glorify and have
glorified them? Nothing of the kind; they only invent them for the most
part to furnish a subject for their verses, and that they may pass for
lovers, or for men valiant enough to be so; and so it suffices me to
think and believe that the good Aldonza Lorenzo is fair and virtuous;
and as to her pedigree it is very little matter, for no one will
examine into it for the purpose of conferring any order upon her, and
I, for my part, reckon her the most exalted princess in the world. For
thou shouldst know, Sancho, if thou dost not know, that two things
alone beyond all others are incentives to love, and these are great
beauty and a good name, and these two things are to be found in
Dulcinea in the highest degree, for in beauty no one equals her and in
good name few approach her; and to put the whole thing in a nutshell, I
persuade myself that all I say is as I say, neither more nor less, and
I picture her in my imagination as I would have her to be, as well in
beauty as in condition; Helen approaches her not nor does Lucretia come
up to her, nor any other of the famous women of times past, Greek,
Barbarian, or Latin; and let each say what he will, for if in this I am
taken to task by the ignorant, I shall not be censured by the
critical.”

“I say that your worship is entirely right,” said Sancho, “and that I
am an ass. But I know not how the name of ass came into my mouth, for a
rope is not to be mentioned in the house of him who has been hanged;
but now for the letter, and then, God be with you, I am off.”

Don Quixote took out the notebook, and, retiring to one side, very
deliberately began to write the letter, and when he had finished it he
called to Sancho, saying he wished to read it to him, so that he might
commit it to memory, in case of losing it on the road; for with evil
fortune like his anything might be apprehended. To which Sancho
replied, “Write it two or three times there in the book and give it to
me, and I will carry it very carefully, because to expect me to keep it
in my memory is all nonsense, for I have such a bad one that I often
forget my own name; but for all that repeat it to me, as I shall like
to hear it, for surely it will run as if it was in print.”

“Listen,” said Don Quixote, “this is what it says:

_“Don Quixote’s Letter to Dulcinea del Toboso_


“Sovereign and exalted Lady,—The pierced by the point of absence, the
wounded to the heart’s core, sends thee, sweetest Dulcinea del Toboso,
the health that he himself enjoys not. If thy beauty despises me, if
thy worth is not for me, if thy scorn is my affliction, though I be
sufficiently long-suffering, hardly shall I endure this anxiety, which,
besides being oppressive, is protracted. My good squire Sancho will
relate to thee in full, fair ingrate, dear enemy, the condition to
which I am reduced on thy account: if it be thy pleasure to give me
relief, I am thine; if not, do as may be pleasing to thee; for by
ending my life I shall satisfy thy cruelty and my desire.
    “Thine till death,
    “The Knight of the Rueful Countenance.”


“By the life of my father,” said Sancho, when he heard the letter, “it
is the loftiest thing I ever heard. Body of me! how your worship says
everything as you like in it! And how well you fit in ‘The Knight of
the Rueful Countenance’ 