ancho Panza, governor of the island of Barataria, whom God
prosper longer than me_. The duchess’s bread would not bake, as the
saying is, until she had read her letter; and having looked over it
herself and seen that it might be read aloud for the duke and all
present to hear, she read out as follows.

TERESA PANZA’S LETTER TO THE DUCHESS.


The letter your highness wrote me, my lady, gave me great pleasure, for
indeed I found it very welcome. The string of coral beads is very fine,
and my husband’s hunting suit does not fall short of it. All this
village is very much pleased that your ladyship has made a governor of
my good man Sancho; though nobody will believe it, particularly the
curate, and Master Nicholas the barber, and the bachelor Samson
Carrasco; but I don’t care for that, for so long as it is true, as it
is, they may all say what they like; though, to tell the truth, if the
coral beads and the suit had not come I would not have believed it
either; for in this village everybody thinks my husband a numskull, and
except for governing a flock of goats, they cannot fancy what sort of
government he can be fit for. God grant it, and direct him according as
he sees his children stand in need of it. I am resolved with your
worship’s leave, lady of my soul, to make the most of this fair day,
and go to Court to stretch myself at ease in a coach, and make all
those I have envying me already burst their eyes out; so I beg your
excellence to order my husband to send me a small trifle of money, and
to let it be something to speak of, because one’s expenses are heavy at
the Court; for a loaf costs a real, and meat thirty maravedis a pound,
which is beyond everything; and if he does not want me to go let him
tell me in time, for my feet are on the fidgets to be off; and my
friends and neighbours tell me that if my daughter and I make a figure
and a brave show at Court, my husband will come to be known far more by
me than I by him, for of course plenty of people will ask, “Who are
those ladies in that coach?” and some servant of mine will answer, “The
wife and daughter of Sancho Panza, governor of the island of
Barataria;” and in this way Sancho will become known, and I’ll be
thought well of, and “to Rome for everything.” I am as vexed as vexed
can be that they have gathered no acorns this year in our village; for
all that I send your highness about half a peck that I went to the wood
to gather and pick out one by one myself, and I could find no bigger
ones; I wish they were as big as ostrich eggs.
    Let not your high mightiness forget to write to me; and I will take
    care to answer, and let you know how I am, and whatever news there
    may be in this place, where I remain, praying our Lord to have your
    highness in his keeping and not to forget me.
    Sancha my daughter, and my son, kiss your worship’s hands.
    She who would rather see your ladyship than write to you,


Your servant,
TERESA PANZA.


All were greatly amused by Teresa Panza’s letter, but particularly the
duke and duchess; and the duchess asked Don Quixote’s opinion whether
they might open the letter that had come for the governor, which she
suspected must be very good. Don Quixote said that to gratify them he
would open it, and did so, and found that it ran as follows.

TERESA PANZA’S LETTER TO HER HUSBAND SANCHO PANZA.


I got thy letter, Sancho of my soul, and I promise thee and swear as a
Catholic Christian that I was within two fingers’ breadth of going mad
I was so happy. I can tell thee, brother, when I came to hear that thou
wert a governor I thought I should have dropped dead with pure joy; and
thou knowest they say sudden joy kills as well as great sorrow; and as
for Sanchica thy daughter, she leaked from sheer happiness. I had
before me the suit thou didst send me, and the coral beads my lady the
duchess sent me round my neck, and the letters in my hands, and there
was the bear