 give me pleasure, nor yet curtailing lest you should deprive me of
it.”

“Señor,” replied Sancho, “if the truth is to be told, nobody copied out
the letter for me, for I carried no letter at all.”

“It is as thou sayest,” said Don Quixote, “for the notebook in which I
wrote it I found in my own possession two days after thy departure,
which gave me very great vexation, as I knew not what thou wouldst do
on finding thyself without any letter; and I made sure thou wouldst
return from the place where thou didst first miss it.”

“So I should have done,” said Sancho, “if I had not got it by heart
when your worship read it to me, so that I repeated it to a sacristan,
who copied it out for me from hearing it, so exactly that he said in
all the days of his life, though he had read many a letter of
excommunication, he had never seen or read so pretty a letter as that.”

“And hast thou got it still in thy memory, Sancho?” said Don Quixote.

“No, señor,” replied Sancho, “for as soon as I had repeated it, seeing
there was no further use for it, I set about forgetting it; and if I
recollect any of it, it is that about ‘Scrubbing,’ I mean to say
‘Sovereign Lady,’ and the end ‘Yours till death, the Knight of the
Rueful Countenance;’ and between these two I put into it more than
three hundred ‘my souls’ and ‘my life’s’ and ‘my eyes.”



c30e.jpg (13K)



CHAPTER XXXI.
OF THE DELECTABLE DISCUSSION BETWEEN DON QUIXOTE AND SANCHO PANZA, HIS
SQUIRE, TOGETHER WITH OTHER INCIDENTS




c31a.jpg (151K)

Full Size




“All that is not unsatisfactory to me,” said Don Quixote. “Go on; thou
didst reach her; and what was that queen of beauty doing? Surely thou
didst find her stringing pearls, or embroidering some device in gold
thread for this her enslaved knight.”

“I did not,” said Sancho, “but I found her winnowing two bushels of
wheat in the yard of her house.”

“Then depend upon it,” said Don Quixote, “the grains of that wheat were
pearls when touched by her hands; and didst thou look, friend? was it
white wheat or brown?”

“It was neither, but red,” said Sancho.

“Then I promise thee,” said Don Quixote, “that, winnowed by her hands,
beyond a doubt the bread it made was of the whitest; but go on; when
thou gavest her my letter, did she kiss it? Did she place it on her
head? Did she perform any ceremony befitting it, or what did she do?”

“When I went to give it to her,” replied Sancho, “she was hard at it
swaying from side to side with a lot of wheat she had in the sieve, and
she said to me, ‘Lay the letter, friend, on the top of that sack, for I
cannot read it until I have done sifting all this.”

“Discreet lady!” said Don Quixote; “that was in order to read it at her
leisure and enjoy it; proceed, Sancho; while she was engaged in her
occupation what converse did she hold with thee? What did she ask about
me, and what answer didst thou give? Make haste; tell me all, and let
not an atom be left behind in the ink-bottle.”

“She asked me nothing,” said Sancho; “but I told her how your worship
was left doing penance in her service, naked from the waist up, in
among these mountains like a savage, sleeping on the ground, not eating
bread off a tablecloth nor combing your beard, weeping and cursing your
fortune.”

“In saying I cursed my fortune thou saidst wrong,” said Don Quixote;
“for rather do I bless it and shall bless it all the days of my life
for having made me worthy of aspiring to love so lofty a lady as
Dulcinea del Toboso.”

“And so lofty she is,” said Sancho, “that she overtops me by more than
a hand’s-breadth.”

“What! Sancho,” said Don Quixote, “didst thou measure with her?”

“I measured in this way,” said Sancho; “going to help her to put a sack
of wheat on the back of an ass, we came so close together that I could
see she stood more than a good palm over me.”

“Well!” said Don Quixote, “and doth she not of a truth accompany and
adorn this grea