hing to be got but a
damaged shoe or a broken rib; and, fool as he was, he was not much
astray in this.

Said Don Quixote, “Sancho, my friend, night is drawing on upon us as we
go, and more darkly than will allow us to reach El Toboso by daylight;
for there I am resolved to go before I engage in another adventure, and
there I shall obtain the blessing and generous permission of the
peerless Dulcinea, with which permission I expect and feel assured that
I shall conclude and bring to a happy termination every perilous
adventure; for nothing in life makes knights-errant more valorous than
finding themselves favoured by their ladies.”



p08b.jpg (283K)

Full Size



“So I believe,” replied Sancho; “but I think it will be difficult for
your worship to speak with her or see her, at any rate where you will
be able to receive her blessing; unless, indeed, she throws it over the
wall of the yard where I saw her the time before, when I took her the
letter that told of the follies and mad things your worship was doing
in the heart of Sierra Morena.”

“Didst thou take that for a yard wall, Sancho,” said Don Quixote,
“where or at which thou sawest that never sufficiently extolled grace
and beauty? It must have been the gallery, corridor, or portico of some
rich and royal palace.”

“It might have been all that,” returned Sancho, “but to me it looked
like a wall, unless I am short of memory.”

“At all events, let us go there, Sancho,” said Don Quixote; “for, so
that I see her, it is the same to me whether it be over a wall, or at a
window, or through the chink of a door, or the grate of a garden; for
any beam of the sun of her beauty that reaches my eyes will give light
to my reason and strength to my heart, so that I shall be unmatched and
unequalled in wisdom and valour.”

“Well, to tell the truth, señor,” said Sancho, “when I saw that sun of
the lady Dulcinea del Toboso, it was not bright enough to throw out
beams at all; it must have been, that as her grace was sifting that
wheat I told you of, the thick dust she raised came before her face
like a cloud and dimmed it.”

“What! dost thou still persist, Sancho,” said Don Quixote, “in saying,
thinking, believing, and maintaining that my lady Dulcinea was sifting
wheat, that being an occupation and task entirely at variance with what
is and should be the employment of persons of distinction, who are
constituted and reserved for other avocations and pursuits that show
their rank a bowshot off? Thou hast forgotten, O Sancho, those lines of
our poet wherein he paints for us how, in their crystal abodes, those
four nymphs employed themselves who rose from their loved Tagus and
seated themselves in a verdant meadow to embroider those tissues which
the ingenious poet there describes to us, how they were worked and
woven with gold and silk and pearls; and something of this sort must
have been the employment of my lady when thou sawest her, only that the
spite which some wicked enchanter seems to have against everything of
mine changes all those things that give me pleasure, and turns them
into shapes unlike their own; and so I fear that in that history of my
achievements which they say is now in print, if haply its author was
some sage who is an enemy of mine, he will have put one thing for
another, mingling a thousand lies with one truth, and amusing himself
by relating transactions which have nothing to do with the sequence of
a true history. O envy, root of all countless evils, and cankerworm of
the virtues! All the vices, Sancho, bring some kind of pleasure with
them; but envy brings nothing but irritation, bitterness, and rage.”

“So I say too,” replied Sancho; “and I suspect in that legend or
history of us that the bachelor Samson Carrasco told us he saw, my
honour goes dragged in the dirt, knocked about, up and down, sweeping
the streets, as they say. And yet, on the faith of an honest man, I
never spoke ill of any 