p to a pitch
of perfection that is out of reach. Are there not almost every day a
thousand comedies represented all round us full of thousands of
inaccuracies and absurdities, and, for all that, they have a successful
run, and are listened to not only with applause, but with admiration
and all the rest of it? Go on, boy, and don’t mind; for so long as I
fill my pouch, no matter if I show as many inaccuracies as there are
motes in a sunbeam.”

“True enough,” said Don Quixote; and the boy went on: “See what a
numerous and glittering crowd of horsemen issues from the city in
pursuit of the two faithful lovers, what a blowing of trumpets there
is, what sounding of horns, what beating of drums and tabors; I fear me
they will overtake them and bring them back tied to the tail of their
own horse, which would be a dreadful sight.”



p26b.jpg (342K)

Full Size



Don Quixote, however, seeing such a swarm of Moors and hearing such a
din, thought it would be right to aid the fugitives, and standing up he
exclaimed in a loud voice, “Never, while I live, will I permit foul
play to be practised in my presence on such a famous knight and
fearless lover as Don Gaiferos. Halt! ill-born rabble, follow him not
nor pursue him, or ye will have to reckon with me in battle!” and
suiting the action to the word, he drew his sword, and with one bound
placed himself close to the show, and with unexampled rapidity and fury
began to shower down blows on the puppet troop of Moors, knocking over
some, decapitating others, maiming this one and demolishing that; and
among many more he delivered one down stroke which, if Master Pedro had
not ducked, made himself small, and got out of the way, would have
sliced off his head as easily as if it had been made of almond-paste.
Master Pedro kept shouting, “Hold hard! Señor Don Quixote! can’t you
see they’re not real Moors you’re knocking down and killing and
destroying, but only little pasteboard figures! Look—sinner that I
am!—how you’re wrecking and ruining all that I’m worth!” But in spite
of this, Don Quixote did not leave off discharging a continuous rain of
cuts, slashes, downstrokes, and backstrokes, and at length, in less
than the space of two credos, he brought the whole show to the ground,
with all its fittings and figures shivered and knocked to pieces, King
Marsilio badly wounded, and the Emperor Charlemagne with his crown and
head split in two. The whole audience was thrown into confusion, the
ape fled to the roof of the inn, the cousin was frightened, and even
Sancho Panza himself was in mighty fear, for, as he swore after the
storm was over, he had never seen his master in such a furious passion.

The complete destruction of the show being thus accomplished, Don
Quixote became a little calmer, said, “I wish I had here before me now
all those who do not or will not believe how useful knights-errant are
in the world; just think, if I had not been here present, what would
have become of the brave Don Gaiferos and the fair Melisendra! Depend
upon it, by this time those dogs would have overtaken them and
inflicted some outrage upon them. So, then, long live knight-errantry
beyond everything living on earth this day!”

“Let it live, and welcome,” said Master Pedro at this in a feeble
voice, “and let me die, for I am so unfortunate that I can say with
King Don Rodrigo—

Yesterday was I lord of Spain
To-day I’ve not a turret left
That I may call mine own.


Not half an hour, nay, barely a minute ago, I saw myself lord of kings
and emperors, with my stables filled with countless horses, and my
trunks and bags with gay dresses unnumbered; and now I find myself
ruined and laid low, destitute and a beggar, and above all without my
ape, for, by my faith, my teeth will have to sweat for it before I have
him caught; and all through the reckless fury of sir knight here, who,
they say, protects the fatherless, and rights wrongs, and does other