; and then the governor
said, “Either I am not good for much, or I’ll get rid of these gambling
houses, for it strikes me they are very mischievous.”

“This one at least,” said one of the notaries, “your worship will not
be able to get rid of, for a great man owns it, and what he loses every
year is beyond all comparison more than what he makes by the cards. On
the minor gambling houses your worship may exercise your power, and it
is they that do most harm and shelter the most barefaced practices; for
in the houses of lords and gentlemen of quality the notorious sharpers
dare not attempt to play their tricks; and as the vice of gambling has
become common, it is better that men should play in houses of repute
than in some tradesman’s, where they catch an unlucky fellow in the
small hours of the morning and skin him alive.”

“I know already, notary, that there is a good deal to be said on that
point,” said Sancho.

And now a tipstaff came up with a young man in his grasp, and said,
“Señor governor, this youth was coming towards us, and as soon as he
saw the officers of justice he turned about and ran like a deer, a sure
proof that he must be some evil-doer; I ran after him, and had it not
been that he stumbled and fell, I should never have caught him.”

“What did you run for, fellow?” said Sancho.

To which the young man replied, “Señor, it was to avoid answering all
the questions officers of justice put.”

“What are you by trade?”

“A weaver.”

“And what do you weave?”

“Lance heads, with your worship’s good leave.”

“You’re facetious with me! You plume yourself on being a wag? Very
good; and where were you going just now?”

“To take the air, señor.”

“And where does one take the air in this island?”

“Where it blows.”

“Good! your answers are very much to the point; you are a smart youth;
but take notice that I am the air, and that I blow upon you a-stern,
and send you to gaol. Ho there! lay hold of him and take him off; I’ll
make him sleep there to-night without air.”

“By God,” said the young man, “your worship will make me sleep in gaol
just as soon as make me king.”

“Why shan’t I make thee sleep in gaol?” said Sancho. “Have I not the
power to arrest thee and release thee whenever I like?”

“All the power your worship has,” said the young man, “won’t be able to
make me sleep in gaol.”

“How? not able!” said Sancho; “take him away at once where he’ll see
his mistake with his own eyes, even if the gaoler is willing to exert
his interested generosity on his behalf; for I’ll lay a penalty of two
thousand ducats on him if he allows him to stir a step from the
prison.”

“That’s ridiculous,” said the young man; “the fact is, all the men on
earth will not make me sleep in prison.”

“Tell me, you devil,” said Sancho, “have you got any angel that will
deliver you, and take off the irons I am going to order them to put
upon you?”

“Now, señor governor,” said the young man in a sprightly manner, “let
us be reasonable and come to the point. Granted your worship may order
me to be taken to prison, and to have irons and chains put on me, and
to be shut up in a cell, and may lay heavy penalties on the gaoler if
he lets me out, and that he obeys your orders; still, if I don’t choose
to sleep, and choose to remain awake all night without closing an eye,
will your worship with all your power be able to make me sleep if I
don’t choose?”

“No, truly,” said the secretary, “and the fellow has made his point.”

“So then,” said Sancho, “it would be entirely of your own choice you
would keep from sleeping; not in opposition to my will?”

“No, señor,” said the youth, “certainly not.”

“Well then, go, and God be with you,” said Sancho; “be off home to
sleep, and God give you sound sleep, for I don’t want to rob you of it;
but for the future, let me advise you don’t joke with the authorities,
because you may come across someone who will bring down the joke on
