ake a choice according to her own taste, she never gave any other
answer than that she had no desire to marry just yet, and that being so
young she did not think herself fit to bear the burden of matrimony. At
these, to all appearance, reasonable excuses that she made, her uncle
ceased to urge her, and waited till she was somewhat more advanced in
age and could mate herself to her own liking. For, said he—and he said
quite right—parents are not to settle children in life against their
will. But when one least looked for it, lo and behold! one day the
demure Marcela makes her appearance turned shepherdess; and, in spite
of her uncle and all those of the town that strove to dissuade her,
took to going a-field with the other shepherd-lasses of the village,
and tending her own flock. And so, since she appeared in public, and
her beauty came to be seen openly, I could not well tell you how many
rich youths, gentlemen and peasants, have adopted the costume of
Chrysostom, and go about these fields making love to her. One of these,
as has been already said, was our deceased friend, of whom they say
that he did not love but adore her. But you must not suppose, because
Marcela chose a life of such liberty and independence, and of so little
or rather no retirement, that she has given any occasion, or even the
semblance of one, for disparagement of her purity and modesty; on the
contrary, such and so great is the vigilance with which she watches
over her honour, that of all those that court and woo her not one has
boasted, or can with truth boast, that she has given him any hope
however small of obtaining his desire. For although she does not avoid
or shun the society and conversation of the shepherds, and treats them
courteously and kindly, should any one of them come to declare his
intention to her, though it be one as proper and holy as that of
matrimony, she flings him from her like a catapult. And with this kind
of disposition she does more harm in this country than if the plague
had got into it, for her affability and her beauty draw on the hearts
of those that associate with her to love her and to court her, but her
scorn and her frankness bring them to the brink of despair; and so they
know not what to say save to proclaim her aloud cruel and hard-hearted,
and other names of the same sort which well describe the nature of her
character; and if you should remain here any time, señor, you would
hear these hills and valleys resounding with the laments of the
rejected ones who pursue her. Not far from this there is a spot where
there are a couple of dozen of tall beeches, and there is not one of
them but has carved and written on its smooth bark the name of Marcela,
and above some a crown carved on the same tree as though her lover
would say more plainly that Marcela wore and deserved that of all human
beauty. Here one shepherd is sighing, there another is lamenting; there
love songs are heard, here despairing elegies. One will pass all the
hours of the night seated at the foot of some oak or rock, and there,
without having closed his weeping eyes, the sun finds him in the
morning bemused and bereft of sense; and another without relief or
respite to his sighs, stretched on the burning sand in the full heat of
the sultry summer noontide, makes his appeal to the compassionate
heavens, and over one and the other, over these and all, the beautiful
Marcela triumphs free and careless. And all of us that know her are
waiting to see what her pride will come to, and who is to be the happy
man that will succeed in taming a nature so formidable and gaining
possession of a beauty so supreme. All that I have told you being such
well-established truth, I am persuaded that what they say of the cause
of Chrysostom’s death, as our lad told us, is the same. And so I advise
you, señor, fail not to be present to-morrow at his burial, which will
be well worth seeing, for Chrysostom had many friends, 