tightly that he did not allow him to breathe, and shouted
aloud, “Help for the Holy Brotherhood! and that you may see I demand it
in earnest, read this warrant which says this highwayman is to be
arrested.”

The curate took the warrant and saw that what the officer said was
true, and that it agreed with Don Quixote’s appearance, who, on his
part, when he found himself roughly handled by this rascally clown,
worked up to the highest pitch of wrath, and all his joints cracking
with rage, with both hands seized the officer by the throat with all
his might, so that had he not been helped by his comrades he would have
yielded up his life ere Don Quixote released his hold. The landlord,
who had perforce to support his brother officers, ran at once to aid
them. The landlady, when she saw her husband engaged in a fresh
quarrel, lifted up her voice afresh, and its note was immediately
caught up by Maritornes and her daughter, calling upon heaven and all
present for help; and Sancho, seeing what was going on, exclaimed, “By
the Lord, it is quite true what my master says about the enchantments
of this castle, for it is impossible to live an hour in peace in it!”

Don Fernando parted the officer and Don Quixote, and to their mutual
contentment made them relax the grip by which they held, the one the
coat collar, the other the throat of his adversary; for all this,
however, the officers did not cease to demand their prisoner and call
on them to help, and deliver him over bound into their power, as was
required for the service of the King and of the Holy Brotherhood, on
whose behalf they again demanded aid and assistance to effect the
capture of this robber and footpad of the highways.

Don Quixote smiled when he heard these words, and said very calmly,
“Come now, base, ill-born brood; call ye it highway robbery to give
freedom to those in bondage, to release the captives, to succour the
miserable, to raise up the fallen, to relieve the needy? Infamous
beings, who by your vile grovelling intellects deserve that heaven
should not make known to you the virtue that lies in knight-errantry,
or show you the sin and ignorance in which ye lie when ye refuse to
respect the shadow, not to say the presence, of any knight-errant! Come
now; band, not of officers, but of thieves; footpads with the licence
of the Holy Brotherhood; tell me who was the ignoramus who signed a
warrant of arrest against such a knight as I am? Who was he that did
not know that knights-errant are independent of all jurisdictions, that
their law is their sword, their charter their prowess, and their edicts
their will? Who, I say again, was the fool that knows not that there
are no letters patent of nobility that confer such privileges or
exemptions as a knight-errant acquires the day he is dubbed a knight,
and devotes himself to the arduous calling of chivalry? What
knight-errant ever paid poll-tax, duty, queen’s pin-money, king’s dues,
toll or ferry? What tailor ever took payment of him for making his
clothes? What castellan that received him in his castle ever made him
pay his shot? What king did not seat him at his table? What damsel was
not enamoured of him and did not yield herself up wholly to his will
and pleasure? And, lastly, what knight-errant has there been, is there,
or will there ever be in the world, not bold enough to give,
single-handed, four hundred cudgellings to four hundred officers of the
Holy Brotherhood if they come in his way?”



CHAPTER XLVI.
OF THE END OF THE NOTABLE ADVENTURE OF THE OFFICERS OF THE HOLY
BROTHERHOOD; AND OF THE GREAT FEROCITY OF OUR WORTHY KNIGHT, DON
QUIXOTE




c46a.jpg (163K)

Full Size




While Don Quixote was talking in this strain, the curate was
endeavouring to persuade the officers that he was out of his senses, as
they might perceive by his deeds and his words, and that they need not
press the matter any further, for even if they arrested him and carr