e on a standard or
ensign of white satin, on which there was painted in a very life-like
style an ass like a little sard, with its head up, its mouth open and
its tongue out, as if it were in the act and attitude of braying; and
round it were inscribed in large characters these two lines—

They did not bray in vain,
Our alcaldes twain.


From this device Don Quixote concluded that these people must be from
the braying town, and he said so to Sancho, explaining to him what was
written on the standard. At the same time be observed that the man who
had told them about the matter was wrong in saying that the two who
brayed were regidors, for according to the lines of the standard they
were alcaldes. To which Sancho replied, “Señor, there’s nothing to
stick at in that, for maybe the regidors who brayed then came to be
alcaldes of their town afterwards, and so they may go by both titles;
moreover, it has nothing to do with the truth of the story whether the
brayers were alcaldes or regidors, provided at any rate they did bray;
for an alcalde is just as likely to bray as a regidor.” They perceived,
in short, clearly that the town which had been twitted had turned out
to do battle with some other that had jeered it more than was fair or
neighbourly.

Don Quixote proceeded to join them, not a little to Sancho’s
uneasiness, for he never relished mixing himself up in expeditions of
that sort. The members of the troop received him into the midst of
them, taking him to be someone who was on their side. Don Quixote,
putting up his visor, advanced with an easy bearing and demeanour to
the standard with the ass, and all the chief men of the army gathered
round him to look at him, staring at him with the usual amazement that
everybody felt on seeing him for the first time. Don Quixote, seeing
them examining him so attentively, and that none of them spoke to him
or put any question to him, determined to take advantage of their
silence; so, breaking his own, he lifted up his voice and said, “Worthy
sirs, I entreat you as earnestly as I can not to interrupt an argument
I wish to address to you, until you find it displeases or wearies you;
and if that come to pass, on the slightest hint you give me I will put
a seal upon my lips and a gag upon my tongue.”

They all bade him say what he liked, for they would listen to him
willingly.



p27b.jpg (330K)

Full Size



With this permission Don Quixote went on to say, “I, sirs, am a
knight-errant whose calling is that of arms, and whose profession is to
protect those who require protection, and give help to such as stand in
need of it. Some days ago I became acquainted with your misfortune and
the cause which impels you to take up arms again and again to revenge
yourselves upon your enemies; and having many times thought over your
business in my mind, I find that, according to the laws of combat, you
are mistaken in holding yourselves insulted; for a private individual
cannot insult an entire community; unless it be by defying it
collectively as a traitor, because he cannot tell who in particular is
guilty of the treason for which he defies it. Of this we have an
example in Don Diego Ordoñez de Lara, who defied the whole town of
Zamora, because he did not know that Vellido Dolfos alone had committed
the treachery of slaying his king; and therefore he defied them all,
and the vengeance and the reply concerned all; though, to be sure,
Señor Don Diego went rather too far, indeed very much beyond the limits
of a defiance; for he had no occasion to defy the dead, or the waters,
or the fishes, or those yet unborn, and all the rest of it as set
forth; but let that pass, for when anger breaks out there’s no father,
governor, or bridle to check the tongue. The case being, then, that no
one person can insult a kingdom, province, city, state, or entire
community, it is clear there is no reason for going out to avenge the
defiance of such an 