hem away, half a dozen nice smooth pebbles,
all of the same weight; and in this way we shall be able to baste one
another without doing ourselves any harm or mischief.”

“Body of my father!” said Sancho, “see what marten and sable, and pads
of carded cotton he is putting into the bags, that our heads may not be
broken and our bones beaten to jelly! But even if they are filled with
toss silk, I can tell you, señor, I am not going to fight; let our
masters fight, that’s their lookout, and let us drink and live; for
time will take care to ease us of our lives, without our going to look
for fillips so that they may be finished off before their proper time
comes and they drop from ripeness.”

“Still,” returned he of the Grove, “we must fight, if it be only for
half an hour.”

“By no means,” said Sancho; “I am not going to be so discourteous or so
ungrateful as to have any quarrel, be it ever so small, with one I have
eaten and drunk with; besides, who the devil could bring himself to
fight in cold blood, without anger or provocation?”

“I can remedy that entirely,” said he of the Grove, “and in this way:
before we begin the battle, I will come up to your worship fair and
softly, and give you three or four buffets, with which I shall stretch
you at my feet and rouse your anger, though it were sleeping sounder
than a dormouse.”

“To match that plan,” said Sancho, “I have another that is not a whit
behind it; I will take a cudgel, and before your worship comes near
enough to waken my anger I will send yours so sound to sleep with
whacks, that it won’t waken unless it be in the other world, where it
is known that I am not a man to let my face be handled by anyone; let
each look out for the arrow—though the surer way would be to let
everyone’s anger sleep, for nobody knows the heart of anyone, and a man
may come for wool and go back shorn; God gave his blessing to peace and
his curse to quarrels; if a hunted cat, surrounded and hard pressed,
turns into a lion, God knows what I, who am a man, may turn into; and
so from this time forth I warn you, sir squire, that all the harm and
mischief that may come of our quarrel will be put down to your
account.”

“Very good,” said he of the Grove; “God will send the dawn and we shall
be all right.”

And now gay-plumaged birds of all sorts began to warble in the trees,
and with their varied and gladsome notes seemed to welcome and salute
the fresh morn that was beginning to show the beauty of her countenance
at the gates and balconies of the east, shaking from her locks a
profusion of liquid pearls; in which dulcet moisture bathed, the
plants, too, seemed to shed and shower down a pearly spray, the willows
distilled sweet manna, the fountains laughed, the brooks babbled, the
woods rejoiced, and the meadows arrayed themselves in all their glory
at her coming. But hardly had the light of day made it possible to see
and distinguish things, when the first object that presented itself to
the eyes of Sancho Panza was the squire of the Grove’s nose, which was
so big that it almost overshadowed his whole body. It is, in fact,
stated, that it was of enormous size, hooked in the middle, covered
with warts, and of a mulberry colour like an egg-plant; it hung down
two fingers’ length below his mouth, and the size, the colour, the
warts, and the bend of it, made his face so hideous, that Sancho, as he
looked at him, began to tremble hand and foot like a child in
convulsions, and he vowed in his heart to let himself be given two
hundred buffets, sooner than be provoked to fight that monster. Don
Quixote examined his adversary, and found that he already had his
helmet on and visor lowered, so that he could not see his face; he
observed, however, that he was a sturdily built man, but not very tall
in stature. Over his armour he wore a surcoat or cassock of what seemed
to be the finest cloth of gold, all bespangled with glittering mirrors
like littl