h the
licentiate had entered the house given to him. The governor again bade
him beware of what he was doing, as the licentiate was beyond a doubt
still mad; but all his cautions and warnings were unavailing to
dissuade the chaplain from taking him away. The governor, seeing that
it was the order of the Archbishop, obeyed, and they dressed the
licentiate in his own clothes, which were new and decent. He, as soon
as he saw himself clothed like one in his senses, and divested of the
appearance of a madman, entreated the chaplain to permit him in charity
to go and take leave of his comrades the madmen. The chaplain said he
would go with him to see what madmen there were in the house; so they
went upstairs, and with them some of those who were present.
Approaching a cage in which there was a furious madman, though just at
that moment calm and quiet, the licentiate said to him, ‘Brother, think
if you have any commands for me, for I am going home, as God has been
pleased, in his infinite goodness and mercy, without any merit of mine,
to restore me my reason. I am now cured and in my senses, for with
God’s power nothing is impossible. Have strong hope and trust in him,
for as he has restored me to my original condition, so likewise he will
restore you if you trust in him. I will take care to send you some good
things to eat; and be sure you eat them; for I would have you know I am
convinced, as one who has gone through it, that all this madness of
ours comes of having the stomach empty and the brains full of wind.
Take courage! take courage! for despondency in misfortune breaks down
health and brings on death.’

“To all these words of the licentiate another madman in a cage opposite
that of the furious one was listening; and raising himself up from an
old mat on which he lay stark naked, he asked in a loud voice who it
was that was going away cured and in his senses. The licentiate
answered, ‘It is I, brother, who am going; I have now no need to remain
here any longer, for which I return infinite thanks to Heaven that has
had so great mercy upon me.’

“‘Mind what you are saying, licentiate; don’t let the devil deceive
you,’ replied the madman. ‘Keep quiet, stay where you are, and you will
save yourself the trouble of coming back.’

“‘I know I am cured,’ returned the licentiate, ‘and that I shall not
have to go stations again.’

“‘You cured!’ said the madman; ‘well, we shall see; God be with you;
but I swear to you by Jupiter, whose majesty I represent on earth, that
for this crime alone, which Seville is committing to-day in releasing
you from this house, and treating you as if you were in your senses, I
shall have to inflict such a punishment on it as will be remembered for
ages and ages, amen. Dost thou not know, thou miserable little
licentiate, that I can do it, being, as I say, Jupiter the Thunderer,
who hold in my hands the fiery bolts with which I am able and am wont
to threaten and lay waste the world? But in one way only will I punish
this ignorant town, and that is by not raining upon it, nor on any part
of its district or territory, for three whole years, to be reckoned
from the day and moment when this threat is pronounced. Thou free, thou
cured, thou in thy senses! and I mad, I disordered, I bound! I will as
soon think of sending rain as of hanging myself.

“Those present stood listening to the words and exclamations of the
madman; but our licentiate, turning to the chaplain and seizing him by
the hands, said to him, ‘Be not uneasy, señor; attach no importance to
what this madman has said; for if he is Jupiter and will not send rain,
I, who am Neptune, the father and god of the waters, will rain as often
as it pleases me and may be needful.’

“The governor and the bystanders laughed, and at their laughter the
chaplain was half ashamed, and he replied, ‘For all that, Señor
Neptune, it will not do to vex Señor Jupiter; remain where you are, and
some other da