and it is not
half a league from this place to where he directed he should be
buried.”

“I will make a point of it,” said Don Quixote, “and I thank you for the
pleasure you have given me by relating so interesting a tale.”

“Oh,” said the goatherd, “I do not know even the half of what has
happened to the lovers of Marcela, but perhaps to-morrow we may fall in
with some shepherd on the road who can tell us; and now it will be well
for you to go and sleep under cover, for the night air may hurt your
wound, though with the remedy I have applied to you there is no fear of
an untoward result.”

Sancho Panza, who was wishing the goatherd’s loquacity at the devil, on
his part begged his master to go into Pedro’s hut to sleep. He did so,
and passed all the rest of the night in thinking of his lady Dulcinea,
in imitation of the lovers of Marcela. Sancho Panza settled himself
between Rocinante and his ass, and slept, not like a lover who had been
discarded, but like a man who had been soundly kicked.



c12e.jpg (42K)



CHAPTER XIII.
IN WHICH IS ENDED THE STORY OF THE SHEPHERDESS MARCELA, WITH OTHER
INCIDENTS



c13a.jpg (181K)

Full Size




But hardly had day begun to show itself through the balconies of the
east, when five of the six goatherds came to rouse Don Quixote and tell
him that if he was still of a mind to go and see the famous burial of
Chrysostom they would bear him company. Don Quixote, who desired
nothing better, rose and ordered Sancho to saddle and pannel at once,
which he did with all despatch, and with the same they all set out
forthwith. They had not gone a quarter of a league when at the meeting
of two paths they saw coming towards them some six shepherds dressed in
black sheepskins and with their heads crowned with garlands of cypress
and bitter oleander. Each of them carried a stout holly staff in his
hand, and along with them there came two men of quality on horseback in
handsome travelling dress, with three servants on foot accompanying
them. Courteous salutations were exchanged on meeting, and inquiring
one of the other which way each party was going, they learned that all
were bound for the scene of the burial, so they went on all together.

One of those on horseback addressing his companion said to him, “It
seems to me, Señor Vivaldo, that we may reckon as well spent the delay
we shall incur in seeing this remarkable funeral, for remarkable it
cannot but be judging by the strange things these shepherds have told
us, of both the dead shepherd and homicide shepherdess.”

“So I think too,” replied Vivaldo, “and I would delay not to say a day,
but four, for the sake of seeing it.”

Don Quixote asked them what it was they had heard of Marcela and
Chrysostom. The traveller answered that the same morning they had met
these shepherds, and seeing them dressed in this mournful fashion they
had asked them the reason of their appearing in such a guise; which one
of them gave, describing the strange behaviour and beauty of a
shepherdess called Marcela, and the loves of many who courted her,
together with the death of that Chrysostom to whose burial they were
going. In short, he repeated all that Pedro had related to Don Quixote.

This conversation dropped, and another was commenced by him who was
called Vivaldo asking Don Quixote what was the reason that led him to
go armed in that fashion in a country so peaceful. To which Don Quixote
replied, “The pursuit of my calling does not allow or permit me to go
in any other fashion; easy life, enjoyment, and repose were invented
for soft courtiers, but toil, unrest, and arms were invented and made
for those alone whom the world calls knights-errant, of whom I, though
unworthy, am the least of all.”

The instant they heard this all set him down as mad, and the better to
settle the point and discover what kind of madness his was, Vivaldo
proceeded to ask him what knights-errant meant.

“Have n