at upon Dapple, and on
a pack-saddle softer than silk itself, and here they’d have me hold on
upon haunches of plank without pad or cushion of any sort! Gad, I have
no notion of bruising myself to get rid of anyone’s beard; let each one
shave himself as best he can; I’m not going to accompany my master on
any such long journey; besides, I can’t give any help to the shaving of
these beards as I can to the disenchantment of my lady Dulcinea.”

“Yes, you can, my friend,” replied the Trifaldi; “and so much, that
without you, so I understand, we shall be able to do nothing.”

“In the king’s name!” exclaimed Sancho, “what have squires got to do
with the adventures of their masters? Are they to have the fame of such
as they go through, and we the labour? Body o’ me! if the historians
would only say, ‘Such and such a knight finished such and such an
adventure, but with the help of so and so, his squire, without which it
would have been impossible for him to accomplish it;’ but they write
curtly, “Don Paralipomenon of the Three Stars accomplished the
adventure of the six monsters;’ without mentioning such a person as his
squire, who was there all the time, just as if there was no such being.
Once more, sirs, I say my master may go alone, and much good may it do
him; and I’ll stay here in the company of my lady the duchess; and
maybe when he comes back, he will find the lady Dulcinea’s affair ever
so much advanced; for I mean in leisure hours, and at idle moments, to
give myself a spell of whipping without so much as a hair to cover me.”

“For all that you must go if it be necessary, my good Sancho,” said the
duchess, “for they are worthy folk who ask you; and the faces of these
ladies must not remain overgrown in this way because of your idle
fears; that would be a hard case indeed.”

“In the king’s name, once more!” said Sancho; “If this charitable work
were to be done for the sake of damsels in confinement or
charity-girls, a man might expose himself to some hardships; but to
bear it for the sake of stripping beards off duennas! Devil take it!
I’d sooner see them all bearded, from the highest to the lowest, and
from the most prudish to the most affected.”

“You are very hard on duennas, Sancho my friend,” said the duchess;
“you incline very much to the opinion of the Toledo apothecary. But
indeed you are wrong; there are duennas in my house that may serve as
patterns of duennas; and here is my Doña Rodriguez, who will not allow
me to say otherwise.”

“Your excellence may say it if you like,” said the Rodriguez; “for God
knows the truth of everything; and whether we duennas are good or bad,
bearded or smooth, we are our mothers’ daughters like other women; and
as God sent us into the world, he knows why he did, and on his mercy I
rely, and not on anybody’s beard.”

“Well, Señora Rodriguez, Señora Trifaldi, and present company,” said
Don Quixote, “I trust in Heaven that it will look with kindly eyes upon
your troubles, for Sancho will do as I bid him. Only let Clavileño come
and let me find myself face to face with Malambruno, and I am certain
no razor will shave you more easily than my sword shall shave
Malambruno’s head off his shoulders; for ‘God bears with the wicked,
but not for ever.’”

“Ah!” exclaimed the Distressed One at this, “may all the stars of the
celestial regions look down upon your greatness with benign eyes,
valiant knight, and shed every prosperity and valour upon your heart,
that it may be the shield and safeguard of the abused and downtrodden
race of duennas, detested by apothecaries, sneered at by squires, and
made game of by pages. Ill betide the jade that in the flower of her
youth would not sooner become a nun than a duenna! Unfortunate beings
that we are, we duennas! Though we may be descended in the direct male
line from Hector of Troy himself, our mistresses never fail to address
us as ‘you’ if they think it makes queens of them. O giant Mala