t day as the three were at table Anselmo asked Lothario to
recite something of what he had composed for his mistress Chloris; for
as Camilla did not know her, he might safely say what he liked.

“Even did she know her,” returned Lothario, “I would hide nothing, for
when a lover praises his lady’s beauty, and charges her with cruelty,
he casts no imputation upon her fair name; at any rate, all I can say
is that yesterday I made a sonnet on the ingratitude of this Chloris,
which goes thus:

SONNET

At midnight, in the silence, when the eyes
Of happier mortals balmy slumbers close,
The weary tale of my unnumbered woes
To Chloris and to Heaven is wont to rise.
And when the light of day returning dyes
The portals of the east with tints of rose,
With undiminished force my sorrow flows
In broken accents and in burning sighs.
And when the sun ascends his star-girt throne,
And on the earth pours down his midday beams,
Noon but renews my wailing and my tears;
And with the night again goes up my moan.
Yet ever in my agony it seems
To me that neither Heaven nor Chloris hears.”


The sonnet pleased Camilla, and still more Anselmo, for he praised it
and said the lady was excessively cruel who made no return for
sincerity so manifest. On which Camilla said, “Then all that
love-smitten poets say is true?”

“As poets they do not tell the truth,” replied Lothario; “but as lovers
they are not more defective in expression than they are truthful.”

“There is no doubt of that,” observed Anselmo, anxious to support and
uphold Lothario’s ideas with Camilla, who was as regardless of his
design as she was deep in love with Lothario; and so taking delight in
anything that was his, and knowing that his thoughts and writings had
her for their object, and that she herself was the real Chloris, she
asked him to repeat some other sonnet or verses if he recollected any.

“I do,” replied Lothario, “but I do not think it as good as the first
one, or, more correctly speaking, less bad; but you can easily judge,
for it is this.

SONNET

I know that I am doomed; death is to me
As certain as that thou, ungrateful fair,
Dead at thy feet shouldst see me lying, ere
My heart repented of its love for thee.
If buried in oblivion I should be,
Bereft of life, fame, favour, even there
It would be found that I thy image bear
Deep graven in my breast for all to see.
This like some holy relic do I prize
To save me from the fate my truth entails,
Truth that to thy hard heart its vigour owes.
Alas for him that under lowering skies,
In peril o’er a trackless ocean sails,
Where neither friendly port nor pole-star shows.”


Anselmo praised this second sonnet too, as he had praised the first;
and so he went on adding link after link to the chain with which he was
binding himself and making his dishonour secure; for when Lothario was
doing most to dishonour him he told him he was most honoured; and thus
each step that Camilla descended towards the depths of her abasement,
she mounted, in his opinion, towards the summit of virtue and fair
fame.

It so happened that finding herself on one occasion alone with her
maid, Camilla said to her, “I am ashamed to think, my dear Leonela, how
lightly I have valued myself that I did not compel Lothario to purchase
by at least some expenditure of time that full possession of me that I
so quickly yielded him of my own free will. I fear that he will think
ill of my pliancy or lightness, not considering the irresistible
influence he brought to bear upon me.”

“Let not that trouble you, my lady,” said Leonela, “for it does not
take away the value of the thing given or make it the less precious to
give it quickly if it be really valuable and worthy of being prized;
nay, they are wont to say that he who gives quickly gives twice.”

“They say also,” said Camilla, “that what costs little is valued less.”

“That saying does not hold good in your case,” replied Leonela, 