 to see to and rectify it; all I say now is, that the additional
fact of his being a sorcerer has removed the sorrow it gave me to see
these white hairs and this venerable countenance in so painful a
position on account of his being a pimp; though I know well there are
no sorceries in the world that can move or compel the will as some
simple folk fancy, for our will is free, nor is there herb or charm
that can force it. All that certain silly women and quacks do is to
turn men mad with potions and poisons, pretending that they have power
to cause love, for, as I say, it is an impossibility to compel the
will.”

“It is true,” said the good old man, “and indeed, sir, as far as the
charge of sorcery goes I was not guilty; as to that of being a pimp I
cannot deny it; but I never thought I was doing any harm by it, for my
only object was that all the world should enjoy itself and live in
peace and quiet, without quarrels or troubles; but my good intentions
were unavailing to save me from going where I never expect to come back
from, with this weight of years upon me and a urinary ailment that
never gives me a moment’s ease;” and again he fell to weeping as
before, and such compassion did Sancho feel for him that he took out a
real of four from his bosom and gave it to him in alms.

Don Quixote went on and asked another what his crime was, and the man
answered with no less but rather much more sprightliness than the last
one.

“I am here because I carried the joke too far with a couple of cousins
of mine, and with a couple of other cousins who were none of mine; in
short, I carried the joke so far with them all that it ended in such a
complicated increase of kindred that no accountant could make it clear:
it was all proved against me, I got no favour, I had no money, I was
near having my neck stretched, they sentenced me to the galleys for six
years, I accepted my fate, it is the punishment of my fault; I am a
young man; let life only last, and with that all will come right. If
you, sir, have anything wherewith to help the poor, God will repay it
to you in heaven, and we on earth will take care in our petitions to
him to pray for the life and health of your worship, that they may be
as long and as good as your amiable appearance deserves.”

This one was in the dress of a student, and one of the guards said he
was a great talker and a very elegant Latin scholar.

Behind all these there came a man of thirty, a very personable fellow,
except that when he looked, his eyes turned in a little one towards the
other. He was bound differently from the rest, for he had to his leg a
chain so long that it was wound all round his body, and two rings on
his neck, one attached to the chain, the other to what they call a
“keep-friend” or “friend’s foot,” from which hung two irons reaching to
his waist with two manacles fixed to them in which his hands were
secured by a big padlock, so that he could neither raise his hands to
his mouth nor lower his head to his hands. Don Quixote asked why this
man carried so many more chains than the others. The guard replied that
it was because he alone had committed more crimes than all the rest put
together, and was so daring and such a villain, that though they
marched him in that fashion they did not feel sure of him, but were in
dread of his making his escape.

“What crimes can he have committed,” said Don Quixote, “if they have
not deserved a heavier punishment than being sent to the galleys?”

“He goes for ten years,” replied the guard, “which is the same thing as
civil death, and all that need be said is that this good fellow is the
famous Gines de Pasamonte, otherwise called Ginesillo de Parapilla.”

“Gently, señor commissary,” said the galley slave at this, “let us have
no fixing of names or surnames; my name is Gines, not Ginesillo, and my
family name is Pasamonte, not Parapilla as you say; let each one mind
his own business, and he will