e, while I make signals
to the fugitives that have left us, that they may learn this exploit
from thy lips.”

The keeper obeyed, and Don Quixote, fixing on the point of his lance
the cloth he had wiped his face with after the deluge of curds,
proceeded to recall the others, who still continued to fly, looking
back at every step, all in a body, the gentleman bringing up the rear.
Sancho, however, happening to observe the signal of the white cloth,
exclaimed, “May I die, if my master has not overcome the wild beasts,
for he is calling to us.”

They all stopped, and perceived that it was Don Quixote who was making
signals, and shaking off their fears to some extent, they approached
slowly until they were near enough to hear distinctly Don Quixote’s
voice calling to them. They returned at length to the cart, and as they
came up, Don Quixote said to the carter, “Put your mules to once more,
brother, and continue your journey; and do thou, Sancho, give him two
gold crowns for himself and the keeper, to compensate for the delay
they have incurred through me.”

“That will I give with all my heart,” said Sancho; “but what has become
of the lions? Are they dead or alive?”

The keeper, then, in full detail, and bit by bit, described the end of
the contest, exalting to the best of his power and ability the valour
of Don Quixote, at the sight of whom the lion quailed, and would not
and dared not come out of the cage, although he had held the door open
ever so long; and showing how, in consequence of his having represented
to the knight that it was tempting God to provoke the lion in order to
force him out, which he wished to have done, he very reluctantly, and
altogether against his will, had allowed the door to be closed.

“What dost thou think of this, Sancho?” said Don Quixote. “Are there
any enchantments that can prevail against true valour? The enchanters
may be able to rob me of good fortune, but of fortitude and courage
they cannot.”

Sancho paid the crowns, the carter put to, the keeper kissed Don
Quixote’s hands for the bounty bestowed upon him, and promised to give
an account of the valiant exploit to the King himself, as soon as he
saw him at court.

“Then,” said Don Quixote, “if his Majesty should happen to ask who
performed it, you must say THE KNIGHT OF THE LIONS; for it is my desire
that into this the name I have hitherto borne of Knight of the Rueful
Countenance be from this time forward changed, altered, transformed,
and turned; and in this I follow the ancient usage of knights-errant,
who changed their names when they pleased, or when it suited their
purpose.”

The cart went its way, and Don Quixote, Sancho, and he of the green
gaban went theirs. All this time, Don Diego de Miranda had not spoken a
word, being entirely taken up with observing and noting all that Don
Quixote did and said, and the opinion he formed was that he was a man
of brains gone mad, and a madman on the verge of rationality. The first
part of his history had not yet reached him, for, had he read it, the
amazement with which his words and deeds filled him would have
vanished, as he would then have understood the nature of his madness;
but knowing nothing of it, he took him to be rational one moment, and
crazy the next, for what he said was sensible, elegant, and well
expressed, and what he did, absurd, rash, and foolish; and said he to
himself, “What could be madder than putting on a helmet full of curds,
and then persuading oneself that enchanters are softening one’s skull;
or what could be greater rashness and folly than wanting to fight lions
tooth and nail?”

Don Quixote roused him from these reflections and this soliloquy by
saying, “No doubt, Señor Don Diego de Miranda, you set me down in your
mind as a fool and a madman, and it would be no wonder if you did, for
my deeds do not argue anything else. But for all that, I would have you
take notice that I am neither so mad nor so