
Teresa stood lost in astonishment, and her daughter just as much, and
the girl said, “May I die but our master Don Quixote’s at the bottom of
this; he must have given father the government or county he so often
promised him.”

“That is the truth,” said the page; “for it is through Señor Don
Quixote that Señor Sancho is now governor of the island of Barataria,
as will be seen by this letter.”

“Will your worship read it to me, noble sir?” said Teresa; “for though
I can spin I can’t read, not a scrap.”

“Nor I either,” said Sanchica; “but wait a bit, and I’ll go and fetch
someone who can read it, either the curate himself or the bachelor
Samson Carrasco, and they’ll come gladly to hear any news of my
father.”

“There is no need to fetch anybody,” said the page; “for though I can’t
spin I can read, and I’ll read it;” and so he read it through, but as
it has been already given it is not inserted here; and then he took out
the other one from the duchess, which ran as follows:

Friend Teresa,—Your husband Sancho’s good qualities, of heart as well
as of head, induced and compelled me to request my husband the duke to
give him the government of one of his many islands. I am told he
governs like a gerfalcon, of which I am very glad, and my lord the
duke, of course, also; and I am very thankful to heaven that I have not
made a mistake in choosing him for that same government; for I would
have Señora Teresa know that a good governor is hard to find in this
world and may God make me as good as Sancho’s way of governing.
Herewith I send you, my dear, a string of coral beads with gold clasps;
I wish they were Oriental pearls; but “he who gives thee a bone does
not wish to see thee dead;” a time will come when we shall become
acquainted and meet one another, but God knows the future. Commend me
to your daughter Sanchica, and tell her from me to hold herself in
readiness, for I mean to make a high match for her when she least
expects it. They tell me there are big acorns in your village; send me
a couple of dozen or so, and I shall value them greatly as coming from
your hand; and write to me at length to assure me of your health and
well-being; and if there be anything you stand in need of, it is but to
open your mouth, and that shall be the measure; and so God keep you.


From this place.
Your loving friend,
THE DUCHESS.


“Ah, what a good, plain, lowly lady!” said Teresa when she heard the
letter; “that I may be buried with ladies of that sort, and not the
gentlewomen we have in this town, that fancy because they are
gentlewomen the wind must not touch them, and go to church with as much
airs as if they were queens, no less, and seem to think they are
disgraced if they look at a farmer’s wife! And see here how this good
lady, for all she’s a duchess, calls me ‘friend,’ and treats me as if I
was her equal—and equal may I see her with the tallest church-tower in
La Mancha! And as for the acorns, señor, I’ll send her ladyship a peck
and such big ones that one might come to see them as a show and a
wonder. And now, Sanchica, see that the gentleman is comfortable; put
up his horse, and get some eggs out of the stable, and cut plenty of
bacon, and let’s give him his dinner like a prince; for the good news
he has brought, and his own bonny face deserve it all; and meanwhile
I’ll run out and give the neighbours the news of our good luck, and
father curate, and Master Nicholas the barber, who are and always have
been such friends of thy father’s.”

“That I will, mother,” said Sanchica; “but mind, you must give me half
of that string; for I don’t think my lady the duchess could have been
so stupid as to send it all to you.”

“It is all for thee, my child,” said Teresa; “but let me wear it round
my neck for a few days; for verily it seems to make my heart glad.”

“You will be glad too,” said the page, “when you see the bundle there
is in this portmanteau, for it is a suit of t