r his ass
being all the while mounted on it.”

“Didn’t I say so?” said Sancho. “I’m a likely one to hide thefts! Why
if I wanted to deal in them, opportunities came ready enough to me in
my government.”

Don Quixote bowed his head, and saluted the duke and duchess and all
the bystanders, and wheeling Rocinante round, Sancho following him on
Dapple, he rode out of the castle, shaping his course for Saragossa.



p57e.jpg (71K)



CHAPTER LVIII.
WHICH TELLS HOW ADVENTURES CAME CROWDING ON DON QUIXOTE IN SUCH NUMBERS
THAT THEY GAVE ONE ANOTHER NO BREATHING-TIME




p58a.jpg (105K)

Full Size



When Don Quixote saw himself in open country, free, and relieved from
the attentions of Altisidora, he felt at his ease, and in fresh spirits
to take up the pursuit of chivalry once more; and turning to Sancho, he
said, “Freedom, Sancho, is one of the most precious gifts that heaven
has bestowed upon men; no treasures that the earth holds buried or the
sea conceals can compare with it; for freedom, as for honour, life may
and should be ventured; and on the other hand, captivity is the
greatest evil that can fall to the lot of man. I say this, Sancho,
because thou hast seen the good cheer, the abundance we have enjoyed in
this castle we are leaving; well then, amid those dainty banquets and
snow-cooled beverages I felt as though I were undergoing the straits of
hunger, because I did not enjoy them with the same freedom as if they
had been mine own; for the sense of being under an obligation to return
benefits and favours received is a restraint that checks the
independence of the spirit. Happy he, to whom heaven has given a piece
of bread for which he is not bound to give thanks to any but heaven
itself!”

“For all your worship says,” said Sancho, “it is not becoming that
there should be no thanks on our part for two hundred gold crowns that
the duke’s majordomo has given me in a little purse which I carry next
my heart, like a warming plaster or comforter, to meet any chance
calls; for we shan’t always find castles where they’ll entertain us;
now and then we may light upon roadside inns where they’ll cudgel us.”

In conversation of this sort the knight and squire errant were pursuing
their journey, when, after they had gone a little more than half a
league, they perceived some dozen men dressed like labourers stretched
upon their cloaks on the grass of a green meadow eating their dinner.
They had beside them what seemed to be white sheets concealing some
objects under them, standing upright or lying flat, and arranged at
intervals. Don Quixote approached the diners, and, saluting them
courteously first, he asked them what it was those cloths covered.
“Señor,” answered one of the party, “under these cloths are some images
carved in relief intended for a retablo we are putting up in our
village; we carry them covered up that they may not be soiled, and on
our shoulders that they may not be broken.”

“With your good leave,” said Don Quixote, “I should like to see them;
for images that are carried so carefully no doubt must be fine ones.”

“I should think they were!” said the other; “let the money they cost
speak for that; for as a matter of fact there is not one of them that
does not stand us in more than fifty ducats; and that your worship may
judge; wait a moment, and you shall see with your own eyes;” and
getting up from his dinner he went and uncovered the first image, which
proved to be one of Saint George on horseback with a serpent writhing
at his feet and the lance thrust down its throat with all that
fierceness that is usually depicted. The whole group was one blaze of
gold, as the saying is. On seeing it Don Quixote said, “That knight was
one of the best knights-errant the army of heaven ever owned; he was
called Don Saint George, and he was moreover a defender of maidens. Let
us see this next one.”

The man uncovered it, and it was seen to be that o