r,” said the servant, “for I have not seen
her face all the way: I have indeed heard her sigh many times and utter
such groans that she seems to be giving up the ghost every time; but it
is no wonder if we do not know more than we have told you, as my
comrade and I have only been in their company two days, for having met
us on the road they begged and persuaded us to accompany them to
Andalusia, promising to pay us well.”

“And have you heard any of them called by his name?” asked the curate.

“No, indeed,” replied the servant; “they all preserve a marvellous
silence on the road, for not a sound is to be heard among them except
the poor lady’s sighs and sobs, which make us pity her; and we feel
sure that wherever it is she is going, it is against her will, and as
far as one can judge from her dress she is a nun or, what is more
likely, about to become one; and perhaps it is because taking the vows
is not of her own free will, that she is so unhappy as she seems to
be.”

“That may well be,” said the curate, and leaving them he returned to
where Dorothea was, who, hearing the veiled lady sigh, moved by natural
compassion drew near to her and said, “What are you suffering from,
señora? If it be anything that women are accustomed and know how to
relieve, I offer you my services with all my heart.”

To this the unhappy lady made no reply; and though Dorothea repeated
her offers more earnestly she still kept silence, until the gentleman
with the veil, who, the servant said, was obeyed by the rest,
approached and said to Dorothea, “Do not give yourself the trouble,
señora, of making any offers to that woman, for it is her way to give
no thanks for anything that is done for her; and do not try to make her
answer unless you want to hear some lie from her lips.”

“I have never told a lie,” was the immediate reply of her who had been
silent until now; “on the contrary, it is because I am so truthful and
so ignorant of lying devices that I am now in this miserable condition;
and this I call you yourself to witness, for it is my unstained truth
that has made you false and a liar.”

Cardenio heard these words clearly and distinctly, being quite close to
the speaker, for there was only the door of Don Quixote’s room between
them, and the instant he did so, uttering a loud exclamation he cried,
“Good God! what is this I hear? What voice is this that has reached my
ears?” Startled at the voice the lady turned her head; and not seeing
the speaker she stood up and attempted to enter the room; observing
which the gentleman held her back, preventing her from moving a step.
In her agitation and sudden movement the silk with which she had
covered her face fell off and disclosed a countenance of incomparable
and marvellous beauty, but pale and terrified; for she kept turning her
eyes, everywhere she could direct her gaze, with an eagerness that made
her look as if she had lost her senses, and so marked that it excited
the pity of Dorothea and all who beheld her, though they knew not what
caused it. The gentleman grasped her firmly by the shoulders, and being
so fully occupied with holding her back, he was unable to put a hand to
his veil which was falling off, as it did at length entirely, and
Dorothea, who was holding the lady in her arms, raising her eyes saw
that he who likewise held her was her husband, Don Fernando. The
instant she recognised him, with a prolonged plaintive cry drawn from
the depths of her heart, she fell backwards fainting, and but for the
barber being close by to catch her in his arms, she would have fallen
completely to the ground. The curate at once hastened to uncover her
face and throw water on it, and as he did so Don Fernando, for he it
was who held the other in his arms, recognised her and stood as if
death-stricken by the sight; not, however, relaxing his grasp of
Luscinda, for it was she that was struggling to release herself from
his hold, having recogn