ttle I have seen I have discovered three things in this author that
deserve to be censured. The first is some words that I have read in the
preface; the next that the language is Aragonese, for sometimes he
writes without articles; and the third, which above all stamps him as
ignorant, is that he goes wrong and departs from the truth in the most
important part of the history, for here he says that my squire Sancho
Panza’s wife is called Mari Gutierrez, when she is called nothing of
the sort, but Teresa Panza; and when a man errs on such an important
point as this there is good reason to fear that he is in error on every
other point in the history.”

“A nice sort of historian, indeed!” exclaimed Sancho at this; “he must
know a deal about our affairs when he calls my wife Teresa Panza, Mari
Gutierrez; take the book again, señor, and see if I am in it and if he
has changed my name.”

“From your talk, friend,” said Don Jeronimo, “no doubt you are Sancho
Panza, Señor Don Quixote’s squire.”

“Yes, I am,” said Sancho; “and I’m proud of it.”

“Faith, then,” said the gentleman, “this new author does not handle you
with the decency that displays itself in your person; he makes you out
a heavy feeder and a fool, and not in the least droll, and a very
different being from the Sancho described in the First Part of your
master’s history.”

“God forgive him,” said Sancho; “he might have left me in my corner
without troubling his head about me; ‘let him who knows how ring the
bells; ‘Saint Peter is very well in Rome.’”

The two gentlemen pressed Don Quixote to come into their room and have
supper with them, as they knew very well there was nothing in that inn
fit for one of his sort. Don Quixote, who was always polite, yielded to
their request and supped with them. Sancho stayed behind with the stew.
and invested with plenary delegated authority seated himself at the
head of the table, and the landlord sat down with him, for he was no
less fond of cow-heel and calves’ feet than Sancho was.

While at supper Don Juan asked Don Quixote what news he had of the lady
Dulcinea del Toboso, was she married, had she been brought to bed, or
was she with child, or did she in maidenhood, still preserving her
modesty and delicacy, cherish the remembrance of the tender passion of
Señor Don Quixote?

To this he replied, “Dulcinea is a maiden still, and my passion more
firmly rooted than ever, our intercourse unsatisfactory as before, and
her beauty transformed into that of a foul country wench;” and then he
proceeded to give them a full and particular account of the enchantment
of Dulcinea, and of what had happened him in the cave of Montesinos,
together with what the sage Merlin had prescribed for her
disenchantment, namely the scourging of Sancho.

Exceedingly great was the amusement the two gentlemen derived from
hearing Don Quixote recount the strange incidents of his history; and
if they were amazed by his absurdities they were equally amazed by the
elegant style in which he delivered them. On the one hand they regarded
him as a man of wit and sense, and on the other he seemed to them a
maundering blockhead, and they could not make up their minds
whereabouts between wisdom and folly they ought to place him.

Sancho having finished his supper, and left the landlord in the X
condition, repaired to the room where his master was, and as he came in
said, “May I die, sirs, if the author of this book your worships have
got has any mind that we should agree; as he calls me glutton
(according to what your worships say) I wish he may not call me
drunkard too.”

“But he does,” said Don Jeronimo; “I cannot remember, however, in what
way, though I know his words are offensive, and what is more, lying, as
I can see plainly by the physiognomy of the worthy Sancho before me.”

“Believe me,” said Sancho, “the Sancho and the Don Quixote of this
history must be different persons from those that appea