 The reader, however, was not to suppose
they were his last word or final effort in the drama, for he had in
hand a comedy called “Engano a los ojos,” about which, if he mistook
not, there would be no question.

Of this dramatic masterpiece the world has no opportunity of judging;
his health had been failing for some time, and he died, apparently of
dropsy, on the 23rd of April, 1616, the day on which England lost
Shakespeare, nominally at least, for the English calendar had not yet
been reformed. He died as he had lived, accepting his lot bravely and
cheerfully.

Was it an unhappy life, that of Cervantes? His biographers all tell us
that it was; but I must say I doubt it. It was a hard life, a life of
poverty, of incessant struggle, of toil ill paid, of disappointment,
but Cervantes carried within himself the antidote to all these evils.
His was not one of those light natures that rise above adversity merely
by virtue of their own buoyancy; it was in the fortitude of a high
spirit that he was proof against it. It is impossible to conceive
Cervantes giving way to despondency or prostrated by dejection. As for
poverty, it was with him a thing to be laughed over, and the only sigh
he ever allows to escape him is when he says, “Happy he to whom Heaven
has given a piece of bread for which he is not bound to give thanks to
any but Heaven itself.” Add to all this his vital energy and mental
activity, his restless invention and his sanguine temperament, and
there will be reason enough to doubt whether his could have been a very
unhappy life. He who could take Cervantes’ distresses together with his
apparatus for enduring them would not make so bad a bargain, perhaps,
as far as happiness in life is concerned.

Of his burial-place nothing is known except that he was buried, in
accordance with his will, in the neighbouring convent of Trinitarian
nuns, of which it is supposed his daughter, Isabel de Saavedra, was an
inmate, and that a few years afterwards the nuns removed to another
convent, carrying their dead with them. But whether the remains of
Cervantes were included in the removal or not no one knows, and the
clue to their resting-place is now lost beyond all hope. This furnishes
perhaps the least defensible of the items in the charge of neglect
brought against his contemporaries. In some of the others there is a
good deal of exaggeration. To listen to most of his biographers one
would suppose that all Spain was in league not only against the man but
against his memory, or at least that it was insensible to his merits,
and left him to live in misery and die of want. To talk of his hard
life and unworthy employments in Andalusia is absurd. What had he done
to distinguish him from thousands of other struggling men earning a
precarious livelihood? True, he was a gallant soldier, who had been
wounded and had undergone captivity and suffering in his country’s
cause, but there were hundreds of others in the same case. He had
written a mediocre specimen of an insipid class of romance, and some
plays which manifestly did not comply with the primary condition of
pleasing: were the playgoers to patronise plays that did not amuse
them, because the author was to produce “Don Quixote” twenty years
afterwards?

The scramble for copies which, as we have seen, followed immediately on
the appearance of the book, does not look like general insensibility to
its merits. No doubt it was received coldly by some, but if a man
writes a book in ridicule of periwigs he must make his account with
being coldly received by the periwig wearers and hated by the whole
tribe of wigmakers. If Cervantes had the chivalry-romance readers, the
sentimentalists, the dramatists, and the poets of the period all
against him, it was because “Don Quixote” was what it was; and if the
general public did not come forward to make him comfortable for the
rest of his days, it is no more to be charged with neglect and
i