t.”

“O scum of the earth!” cried Sancho at this, “O miserable, spiteful
enchanters! O that I could see you all strung by the gills, like
sardines on a twig! Ye know a great deal, ye can do a great deal, and
ye do a great deal more. It ought to have been enough for you, ye
scoundrels, to have changed the pearls of my lady’s eyes into oak
galls, and her hair of purest gold into the bristles of a red ox’s
tail, and in short, all her features from fair to foul, without
meddling with her smell; for by that we might somehow have found out
what was hidden underneath that ugly rind; though, to tell the truth, I
never perceived her ugliness, but only her beauty, which was raised to
the highest pitch of perfection by a mole she had on her right lip,
like a moustache, with seven or eight red hairs like threads of gold,
and more than a palm long.”

“From the correspondence which exists between those of the face and
those of the body,” said Don Quixote, “Dulcinea must have another mole
resembling that on the thick of the thigh on that side on which she has
the one on her face; but hairs of the length thou hast mentioned are
very long for moles.”

“Well, all I can say is there they were as plain as could be,” replied
Sancho.

“I believe it, my friend,” returned Don Quixote; “for nature bestowed
nothing on Dulcinea that was not perfect and well-finished; and so, if
she had a hundred moles like the one thou hast described, in her they
would not be moles, but moons and shining stars. But tell me, Sancho,
that which seemed to me to be a pack-saddle as thou wert fixing it, was
it a flat-saddle or a side-saddle?”

“It was neither,” replied Sancho, “but a jineta saddle, with a field
covering worth half a kingdom, so rich is it.”

“And that I could not see all this, Sancho!” said Don Quixote; “once
more I say, and will say a thousand times, I am the most unfortunate of
men.”

Sancho, the rogue, had enough to do to hide his laughter, at hearing
the simplicity of the master he had so nicely befooled. At length,
after a good deal more conversation had passed between them, they
remounted their beasts, and followed the road to Saragossa, which they
expected to reach in time to take part in a certain grand festival
which is held every year in that illustrious city; but before they got
there things happened to them, so many, so important, and so strange,
that they deserve to be recorded and read, as will be seen farther on.



p10e.jpg (56K)

Full Size



CHAPTER XI.
OF THE STRANGE ADVENTURE WHICH THE VALIANT DON QUIXOTE HAD WITH THE CAR
OR CART OF “THE CORTES OF DEATH”




p11a.jpg (172K)

Full Size



Dejected beyond measure did Don Quixote pursue his journey, turning
over in his mind the cruel trick the enchanters had played him in
changing his lady Dulcinea into the vile shape of the village lass, nor
could he think of any way of restoring her to her original form; and
these reflections so absorbed him, that without being aware of it he
let go Rocinante’s bridle, and he, perceiving the liberty that was
granted him, stopped at every step to crop the fresh grass with which
the plain abounded.

Sancho recalled him from his reverie. “Melancholy, señor,” said he,
“was made, not for beasts, but for men; but if men give way to it
overmuch they turn to beasts; control yourself, your worship; be
yourself again; gather up Rocinante’s reins; cheer up, rouse yourself
and show that gallant spirit that knights-errant ought to have. What
the devil is this? What weakness is this? Are we here or in France? The
devil fly away with all the Dulcineas in the world; for the well-being
of a single knight-errant is of more consequence than all the
enchantments and transformations on earth.”

“Hush, Sancho,” said Don Quixote in a weak and faint voice, “hush and
utter no blasphemies against that enchanted lady; for I alone am to
blame for her misfortune and hard fate; her calamity has co