my memory.”

“A vision it must have been, no doubt,” said Don Quixote, “for there is
no other I in the world; this history has been going about here for
some time from hand to hand, but it does not stay long in any, for
everybody gives it a taste of his foot. I am not disturbed by hearing
that I am wandering in a fantastic shape in the darkness of the pit or
in the daylight above, for I am not the one that history treats of. If
it should be good, faithful, and true, it will have ages of life; but
if it should be bad, from its birth to its burial will not be a very
long journey.”

Altisidora was about to proceed with her complaint against Don Quixote,
when he said to her, “I have several times told you, señora, that it
grieves me you should have set your affections upon me, as from mine
they can only receive gratitude, but no return. I was born to belong to
Dulcinea del Toboso, and the fates, if there are any, dedicated me to
her; and to suppose that any other beauty can take the place she
occupies in my heart is to suppose an impossibility. This frank
declaration should suffice to make you retire within the bounds of your
modesty, for no one can bind himself to do impossibilities.”

Hearing this, Altisidora, with a show of anger and agitation,
exclaimed, “God’s life! Don Stockfish, soul of a mortar, stone of a
date, more obstinate and obdurate than a clown asked a favour when he
has his mind made up, if I fall upon you I’ll tear your eyes out! Do
you fancy, Don Vanquished, Don Cudgelled, that I died for your sake?
All that you have seen to-night has been make-believe; I’m not the
woman to let the black of my nail suffer for such a camel, much less
die!”

“That I can well believe,” said Sancho; “for all that about lovers
pining to death is absurd; they may talk of it, but as for doing
it—Judas may believe that!”

While they were talking, the musician, singer, and poet, who had sung
the two stanzas given above came in, and making a profound obeisance to
Don Quixote said, “Will your worship, sir knight, reckon and retain me
in the number of your most faithful servants, for I have long been a
great admirer of yours, as well because of your fame as because of your
achievements?” “Will your worship tell me who you are,” replied Don
Quixote, “so that my courtesy may be answerable to your deserts?” The
young man replied that he was the musician and songster of the night
before. “Of a truth,” said Don Quixote, “your worship has a most
excellent voice; but what you sang did not seem to me very much to the
purpose; for what have Garcilasso’s stanzas to do with the death of
this lady?”

“Don’t be surprised at that,” returned the musician; “for with the
callow poets of our day the way is for every one to write as he pleases
and pilfer where he chooses, whether it be germane to the matter or
not, and now-a-days there is no piece of silliness they can sing or
write that is not set down to poetic licence.”

Don Quixote was about to reply, but was prevented by the duke and
duchess, who came in to see him, and with them there followed a long
and delightful conversation, in the course of which Sancho said so many
droll and saucy things that he left the duke and duchess wondering not
only at his simplicity but at his sharpness. Don Quixote begged their
permission to take his departure that same day, inasmuch as for a
vanquished knight like himself it was fitter he should live in a
pig-sty than in a royal palace. They gave it very readily, and the
duchess asked him if Altisidora was in his good graces.

He replied, “Señora, let me tell your ladyship that this damsel’s
ailment comes entirely of idleness, and the cure for it is honest and
constant employment. She herself has told me that lace is worn in hell;
and as she must know how to make it, let it never be out of her hands;
for when she is occupied in shifting the bobbins to and fro, the image
or images of what she loves will 