n his breast in manifest mortification; and Don Quixote glanced
at Sancho and saw him with his cheeks puffed out and his mouth full of
laughter, and evidently ready to explode with it, and in spite of his
vexation he could not help laughing at the sight of him; and when
Sancho saw his master begin he let go so heartily that he had to hold
his sides with both hands to keep himself from bursting with laughter.
Four times he stopped, and as many times did his laughter break out
afresh with the same violence as at first, whereat Don Quixote grew
furious, above all when he heard him say mockingly, “Thou must know,
friend Sancho, that of Heaven’s will I was born in this our iron age to
revive in it the golden or age of gold; I am he for whom are reserved
perils, mighty achievements, valiant deeds;” and here he went on
repeating the words that Don Quixote uttered the first time they heard
the awful strokes.

Don Quixote, then, seeing that Sancho was turning him into ridicule,
was so mortified and vexed that he lifted up his pike and smote him two
such blows that if, instead of catching them on his shoulders, he had
caught them on his head there would have been no wages to pay, unless
indeed to his heirs. Sancho seeing that he was getting an awkward
return in earnest for his jest, and fearing his master might carry it
still further, said to him very humbly, “Calm yourself, sir, for by God
I am only joking.”

“Well, then, if you are joking I am not,” replied Don Quixote. “Look
here, my lively gentleman, if these, instead of being fulling hammers,
had been some perilous adventure, have I not, think you, shown the
courage required for the attempt and achievement? Am I, perchance,
being, as I am, a gentleman, bound to know and distinguish sounds and
tell whether they come from fulling mills or not; and that, when
perhaps, as is the case, I have never in my life seen any as you have,
low boor as you are, that have been born and bred among them? But turn
me these six hammers into six giants, and bring them to beard me, one
by one or all together, and if I do not knock them head over heels,
then make what mockery you like of me.”

“No more of that, señor,” returned Sancho; “I own I went a little too
far with the joke. But tell me, your worship, now that peace is made
between us (and may God bring you out of all the adventures that may
befall you as safe and sound as he has brought you out of this one),
was it not a thing to laugh at, and is it not a good story, the great
fear we were in?—at least that I was in; for as to your worship I see
now that you neither know nor understand what either fear or dismay
is.”

“I do not deny,” said Don Quixote, “that what happened to us may be
worth laughing at, but it is not worth making a story about, for it is
not everyone that is shrewd enough to hit the right point of a thing.”

“At any rate,” said Sancho, “your worship knew how to hit the right
point with your pike, aiming at my head and hitting me on the
shoulders, thanks be to God and my own smartness in dodging it. But let
that pass; all will come out in the scouring; for I have heard say ‘he
loves thee well that makes thee weep;’ and moreover that it is the way
with great lords after any hard words they give a servant to give him a
pair of breeches; though I do not know what they give after blows,
unless it be that knights-errant after blows give islands, or kingdoms
on the mainland.”

“It may be on the dice,” said Don Quixote, “that all thou sayest will
come true; overlook the past, for thou art shrewd enough to know that
our first movements are not in our own control; and one thing for the
future bear in mind, that thou curb and restrain thy loquacity in my
company; for in all the books of chivalry that I have read, and they
are innumerable, I never met with a squire who talked so much to his
lord as thou dost to thine; and in fact I feel it to be a great fault
of thine and of mi