he finest cloth, that the
governor only wore one day out hunting and now sends, all for Señora
Sanchica.”

“May he live a thousand years,” said Sanchica, “and the bearer as many,
nay two thousand, if needful.”

With this Teresa hurried out of the house with the letters, and with
the string of beads round her neck, and went along thrumming the
letters as if they were a tambourine, and by chance coming across the
curate and Samson Carrasco she began capering and saying, “None of us
poor now, faith! We’ve got a little government! Ay, let the finest fine
lady tackle me, and I’ll give her a setting down!”

“What’s all this, Teresa Panza,” said they; “what madness is this, and
what papers are those?”

“The madness is only this,” said she, “that these are the letters of
duchesses and governors, and these I have on my neck are fine coral
beads, with ave-marias and paternosters of beaten gold, and I am a
governess.”

“God help us,” said the curate, “we don’t understand you, Teresa, or
know what you are talking about.”

“There, you may see it yourselves,” said Teresa, and she handed them
the letters.

The curate read them out for Samson Carrasco to hear, and Samson and he
regarded one another with looks of astonishment at what they had read,
and the bachelor asked who had brought the letters. Teresa in reply
bade them come with her to her house and they would see the messenger,
a most elegant youth, who had brought another present which was worth
as much more. The curate took the coral beads from her neck and
examined them again and again, and having satisfied himself as to their
fineness he fell to wondering afresh, and said, “By the gown I wear I
don’t know what to say or think of these letters and presents; on the
one hand I can see and feel the fineness of these coral beads, and on
the other I read how a duchess sends to beg for a couple of dozen of
acorns.”

“Square that if you can,” said Carrasco; “well, let’s go and see the
messenger, and from him we’ll learn something about this mystery that
has turned up.”

They did so, and Teresa returned with them. They found the page sifting
a little barley for his horse, and Sanchica cutting a rasher of bacon
to be paved with eggs for his dinner. His looks and his handsome
apparel pleased them both greatly; and after they had saluted him
courteously, and he them, Samson begged him to give them his news, as
well of Don Quixote as of Sancho Panza, for, he said, though they had
read the letters from Sancho and her ladyship the duchess, they were
still puzzled and could not make out what was meant by Sancho’s
government, and above all of an island, when all or most of those in
the Mediterranean belonged to his Majesty.

To this the page replied, “As to Señor Sancho Panza’s being a governor
there is no doubt whatever; but whether it is an island or not that he
governs, with that I have nothing to do; suffice it that it is a town
of more than a thousand inhabitants; with regard to the acorns I may
tell you my lady the duchess is so unpretending and unassuming that,
not to speak of sending to beg for acorns from a peasant woman, she has
been known to send to ask for the loan of a comb from one of her
neighbours; for I would have your worships know that the ladies of
Aragon, though they are just as illustrious, are not so punctilious and
haughty as the Castilian ladies; they treat people with greater
familiarity.”

In the middle of this conversation Sanchica came in with her skirt full
of eggs, and said she to the page, “Tell me, señor, does my father wear
trunk-hose since he has been governor?”

“I have not noticed,” said the page; “but no doubt he wears them.”

“Ah! my God!” said Sanchica, “what a sight it must be to see my father
in tights! Isn’t it odd that ever since I was born I have had a longing
to see my father in trunk-hose?”

“As things go you will see that if you live,” said the page; “by God he
is in the way