nd the devil’s knowledge extends no further; for the
future he knows only by guesswork, and that not always; for it is
reserved for God alone to know the times and the seasons, and for him
there is neither past nor future; all is present. This being as it is,
it is clear that this ape speaks by the spirit of the devil; and I am
astonished they have not denounced him to the Holy Office, and put him
to the question, and forced it out of him by whose virtue it is that he
divines; because it is certain this ape is not an astrologer; neither
his master nor he sets up, or knows how to set up, those figures they
call judiciary, which are now so common in Spain that there is not a
jade, or page, or old cobbler, that will not undertake to set up a
figure as readily as pick up a knave of cards from the ground, bringing
to nought the marvellous truth of the science by their lies and
ignorance. I know of a lady who asked one of these figure schemers
whether her little lap-dog would be in pup and would breed, and how
many and of what colour the little pups would be. To which señor
astrologer, after having set up his figure, made answer that the bitch
would be in pup, and would drop three pups, one green, another bright
red, and the third parti-coloured, provided she conceived between
eleven and twelve either of the day or night, and on a Monday or
Saturday; but as things turned out, two days after this the bitch died
of a surfeit, and señor planet-ruler had the credit all over the place
of being a most profound astrologer, as most of these planet-rulers
have.”

“Still,” said Sancho, “I would be glad if your worship would make
Master Pedro ask his ape whether what happened your worship in the cave
of Montesinos is true; for, begging your worship’s pardon, I, for my
part, take it to have been all flam and lies, or at any rate something
you dreamt.”

“That may be,” replied Don Quixote; “however, I will do what you
suggest; though I have my own scruples about it.”

At this point Master Pedro came up in quest of Don Quixote, to tell him
the show was now ready and to come and see it, for it was worth seeing.
Don Quixote explained his wish, and begged him to ask his ape at once
to tell him whether certain things which had happened to him in the
cave of Montesinos were dreams or realities, for to him they appeared
to partake of both. Upon this Master Pedro, without answering, went
back to fetch the ape, and, having placed it in front of Don Quixote
and Sancho, said: “See here, señor ape, this gentleman wishes to know
whether certain things which happened to him in the cave called the
cave of Montesinos were false or true.” On his making the usual sign
the ape mounted on his left shoulder and seemed to whisper in his ear,
and Master Pedro said at once, “The ape says that the things you saw or
that happened to you in that cave are, part of them false, part true;
and that he only knows this and no more as regards this question; but
if your worship wishes to know more, on Friday next he will answer all
that may be asked him, for his virtue is at present exhausted, and will
not return to him till Friday, as he has said.”

“Did I not say, señor,” said Sancho, “that I could not bring myself to
believe that all your worship said about the adventures in the cave was
true, or even the half of it?”

“The course of events will tell, Sancho,” replied Don Quixote; “time,
that discloses all things, leaves nothing that it does not drag into
the light of day, though it be buried in the bosom of the earth. But
enough of that for the present; let us go and see Master Pedro’s show,
for I am sure there must be something novel in it.”

“Something!” said Master Pedro; “this show of mine has sixty thousand
novel things in it; let me tell you, Señor Don Quixote, it is one of
the best-worth-seeing things in the world this day; but _operibus
credite et non verbis_, and now let’s get to work, for it is growing