t sort.”

“Well then, in troth,” returned Sancho, “I have heard my master, who is
the very treasure-finder of stories, telling the story of Lancelot when
he came from Britain, say that ladies waited upon him and duennas upon
his hack; and, if it comes to my ass, I wouldn’t change him for Señor
Lancelot’s hack.”

“If you are a jester, brother,” said the duenna, “keep your drolleries
for some place where they’ll pass muster and be paid for; for you’ll
get nothing from me but a fig.”

“At any rate, it will be a very ripe one,” said Sancho, “for you won’t
lose the trick in years by a point too little.”

“Son of a bitch,” said the duenna, all aglow with anger, “whether I’m
old or not, it’s with God I have to reckon, not with you, you
garlic-stuffed scoundrel!” and she said it so loud, that the duchess
heard it, and turning round and seeing the duenna in such a state of
excitement, and her eyes flaming so, asked whom she was wrangling with.

“With this good fellow here,” said the duenna, “who has particularly
requested me to go and put an ass of his that is at the castle gate
into the stable, holding it up to me as an example that they did the
same I don’t know where—that some ladies waited on one Lancelot, and
duennas on his hack; and what is more, to wind up with, he called me
old.”

“That,” said the duchess, “I should have considered the greatest
affront that could be offered me;” and addressing Sancho, she said to
him, “You must know, friend Sancho, that Doña Rodriguez is very
youthful, and that she wears that hood more for authority and custom’s
sake than because of her years.”

“May all the rest of mine be unlucky,” said Sancho, “if I meant it that
way; I only spoke because the affection I have for my ass is so great,
and I thought I could not commend him to a more kind-hearted person
than the lady Doña Rodriguez.”

Don Quixote, who was listening, said to him, “Is this proper
conversation for the place, Sancho?”

“Señor,” replied Sancho, “every one must mention what he wants wherever
he may be; I thought of Dapple here, and I spoke of him here; if I had
thought of him in the stable I would have spoken there.”

On which the duke observed, “Sancho is quite right, and there is no
reason at all to find fault with him; Dapple shall be fed to his
heart’s content, and Sancho may rest easy, for he shall be treated like
himself.”

While this conversation, amusing to all except Don Quixote, was
proceeding, they ascended the staircase and ushered Don Quixote into a
chamber hung with rich cloth of gold and brocade; six damsels relieved
him of his armour and waited on him like pages, all of them prepared
and instructed by the duke and duchess as to what they were to do, and
how they were to treat Don Quixote, so that he might see and believe
they were treating him like a knight-errant. When his armour was
removed, there stood Don Quixote in his tight-fitting breeches and
chamois doublet, lean, lanky, and long, with cheeks that seemed to be
kissing each other inside; such a figure, that if the damsels waiting
on him had not taken care to check their merriment (which was one of
the particular directions their master and mistress had given them),
they would have burst with laughter. They asked him to let himself be
stripped that they might put a shirt on him, but he would not on any
account, saying that modesty became knights-errant just as much as
valour. However, he said they might give the shirt to Sancho; and
shutting himself in with him in a room where there was a sumptuous bed,
he undressed and put on the shirt; and then, finding himself alone with
Sancho, he said to him, “Tell me, thou new-fledged buffoon and old
booby, dost thou think it right to offend and insult a duenna so
deserving of reverence and respect as that one just now? Was that a
time to bethink thee of thy Dapple, or are these noble personages
likely to let the beasts fare badly when they treat thei