to your
complaints, housekeeper, I know not, nor what his Majesty will answer
either; I only know that if I were king I should decline to answer the
numberless silly petitions they present every day; for one of the
greatest among the many troubles kings have is being obliged to listen
to all and answer all, and therefore I should be sorry that any affairs
of mine should worry him.”

Whereupon the housekeeper said, “Tell us, señor, at his Majesty’s court
are there no knights?”

“There are,” replied Don Quixote, “and plenty of them; and it is right
there should be, to set off the dignity of the prince, and for the
greater glory of the king’s majesty.”

“Then might not your worship,” said she, “be one of those that, without
stirring a step, serve their king and lord in his court?”

“Recollect, my friend,” said Don Quixote, “all knights cannot be
courtiers, nor can all courtiers be knights-errant, nor need they be.
There must be all sorts in the world; and though we may be all knights,
there is a great difference between one and another; for the courtiers,
without quitting their chambers, or the threshold of the court, range
the world over by looking at a map, without its costing them a
farthing, and without suffering heat or cold, hunger or thirst; but we,
the true knights-errant, measure the whole earth with our own feet,
exposed to the sun, to the cold, to the air, to the inclemencies of
heaven, by day and night, on foot and on horseback; nor do we only know
enemies in pictures, but in their own real shapes; and at all risks and
on all occasions we attack them, without any regard to childish points
or rules of single combat, whether one has or has not a shorter lance
or sword, whether one carries relics or any secret contrivance about
him, whether or not the sun is to be divided and portioned out, and
other niceties of the sort that are observed in set combats of man to
man, that you know nothing about, but I do. And you must know besides,
that the true knight-errant, though he may see ten giants, that not
only touch the clouds with their heads but pierce them, and that go,
each of them, on two tall towers by way of legs, and whose arms are
like the masts of mighty ships, and each eye like a great mill-wheel,
and glowing brighter than a glass furnace, must not on any account be
dismayed by them. On the contrary, he must attack and fall upon them
with a gallant bearing and a fearless heart, and, if possible, vanquish
and destroy them, even though they have for armour the shells of a
certain fish, that they say are harder than diamonds, and in place of
swords wield trenchant blades of Damascus steel, or clubs studded with
spikes also of steel, such as I have more than once seen. All this I
say, housekeeper, that you may see the difference there is between the
one sort of knight and the other; and it would be well if there were no
prince who did not set a higher value on this second, or more properly
speaking first, kind of knights-errant; for, as we read in their
histories, there have been some among them who have been the salvation,
not merely of one kingdom, but of many.”

“Ah, señor,” here exclaimed the niece, “remember that all this you are
saying about knights-errant is fable and fiction; and their histories,
if indeed they were not burned, would deserve, each of them, to have a
sambenito put on it, or some mark by which it might be known as
infamous and a corrupter of good manners.”

“By the God that gives me life,” said Don Quixote, “if thou wert not my
full niece, being daughter of my own sister, I would inflict a
chastisement upon thee for the blasphemy thou hast uttered that all the
world should ring with. What! can it be that a young hussy that hardly
knows how to handle a dozen lace-bobbins dares to wag her tongue and
criticise the histories of knights-errant? What would Señor Amadis say
if he heard of such a thing? He, however, no doubt would forgive th