 you to pieces!”

“Rabble!” returned Don Quixote, “I care nothing for bulls, be they the
fiercest Jarama breeds on its banks. Confess at once, scoundrels, that
what I have declared is true; else ye have to deal with me in combat.”

The herdsman had no time to reply, nor Don Quixote to get out of the
way even if he wished; and so the drove of fierce bulls and tame
bullocks, together with the crowd of herdsmen and others who were
taking them to be penned up in a village where they were to be run the
next day, passed over Don Quixote and over Sancho, Rocinante and
Dapple, hurling them all to the earth and rolling them over on the
ground. Sancho was left crushed, Don Quixote scared, Dapple belaboured
and Rocinante in no very sound condition.



p58c.jpg (399K)

Full Size



They all got up, however, at length, and Don Quixote in great haste,
stumbling here and falling there, started off running after the drove,
shouting out, “Hold! stay! ye rascally rabble, a single knight awaits
you, and he is not of the temper or opinion of those who say, ‘For a
flying enemy make a bridge of silver.’” The retreating party in their
haste, however, did not stop for that, or heed his menaces any more
than last year’s clouds. Weariness brought Don Quixote to a halt, and
more enraged than avenged he sat down on the road to wait until Sancho,
Rocinante and Dapple came up. When they reached him master and man
mounted once more, and without going back to bid farewell to the mock
or imitation Arcadia, and more in humiliation than contentment, they
continued their journey.



p58e.jpg (68K)

Full Size



CHAPTER LIX.
WHEREIN IS RELATED THE STRANGE THING, WHICH MAY BE REGARDED AS AN
ADVENTURE, THAT HAPPENED DON QUIXOTE




p59a.jpg (126K)

Full Size



A clear limpid spring which they discovered in a cool grove relieved
Don Quixote and Sancho of the dust and fatigue due to the unpolite
behaviour of the bulls, and by the side of this, having turned Dapple
and Rocinante loose without headstall or bridle, the forlorn pair,
master and man, seated themselves. Sancho had recourse to the larder of
his alforjas and took out of them what he called the prog; Don Quixote
rinsed his mouth and bathed his face, by which cooling process his
flagging energies were revived. Out of pure vexation he remained
without eating, and out of pure politeness Sancho did not venture to
touch a morsel of what was before him, but waited for his master to act
as taster. Seeing, however, that, absorbed in thought, he was
forgetting to carry the bread to his mouth, he said never a word, and
trampling every sort of good breeding under foot, began to stow away in
his paunch the bread and cheese that came to his hand.



p59b.jpg (370K)

Full Size



“Eat, Sancho my friend,” said Don Quixote; “support life, which is of
more consequence to thee than to me, and leave me to die under the pain
of my thoughts and pressure of my misfortunes. I was born, Sancho, to
live dying, and thou to die eating; and to prove the truth of what I
say, look at me, printed in histories, famed in arms, courteous in
behaviour, honoured by princes, courted by maidens; and after all, when
I looked forward to palms, triumphs, and crowns, won and earned by my
valiant deeds, I have this morning seen myself trampled on, kicked, and
crushed by the feet of unclean and filthy animals. This thought blunts
my teeth, paralyses my jaws, cramps my hands, and robs me of all
appetite for food; so much so that I have a mind to let myself die of
hunger, the cruelest death of all deaths.”

“So then,” said Sancho, munching hard all the time, “your worship does
not agree with the proverb that says, ‘Let Martha die, but let her die
with a full belly.’ I, at any rate, have no mind to kill myself; so far
from that, I mean to do as the cobbler does, who stretches the leather
with his teeth until he makes it reach as far as he wants. I’ll stretch