e days of my life to the service
of so exalted a lady. I am a labouring man, my name is Sancho Panza, I
am married, I have children, and I am serving as a squire; if in any
one of these ways I can serve your highness, I will not be longer in
obeying than your grace in commanding.”

“It is easy to see, Sancho,” replied the duchess, “that you have
learned to be polite in the school of politeness itself; I mean to say
it is easy to see that you have been nursed in the bosom of Señor Don
Quixote, who is, of course, the cream of good breeding and flower of
ceremony—or cirimony, as you would say yourself. Fair be the fortunes
of such a master and such a servant, the one the cynosure of
knight-errantry, the other the star of squirely fidelity! Rise, Sancho,
my friend; I will repay your courtesy by taking care that my lord the
duke makes good to you the promised gift of the government as soon as
possible.”

With this, the conversation came to an end, and Don Quixote retired to
take his midday sleep; but the duchess begged Sancho, unless he had a
very great desire to go to sleep, to come and spend the afternoon with
her and her damsels in a very cool chamber. Sancho replied that, though
he certainly had the habit of sleeping four or five hours in the heat
of the day in summer, to serve her excellence he would try with all his
might not to sleep even one that day, and that he would come in
obedience to her command, and with that he went off. The duke gave
fresh orders with respect to treating Don Quixote as a knight-errant,
without departing even in smallest particular from the style in which,
as the stories tell us, they used to treat the knights of old.



p32e.jpg (16K)



CHAPTER XXXIII.
OF THE DELECTABLE DISCOURSE WHICH THE DUCHESS AND HER DAMSELS HELD WITH
SANCHO PANZA, WELL WORTH READING AND NOTING




p33a.jpg (138K)

Full Size



The history records that Sancho did not sleep that afternoon, but in
order to keep his word came, before he had well done dinner, to visit
the duchess, who, finding enjoyment in listening to him, made him sit
down beside her on a low seat, though Sancho, out of pure good
breeding, wanted not to sit down; the duchess, however, told him he was
to sit down as governor and talk as squire, as in both respects he was
worthy of even the chair of the Cid Ruy Diaz the Campeador. Sancho
shrugged his shoulders, obeyed, and sat down, and all the duchess’s
damsels and duennas gathered round him, waiting in profound silence to
hear what he would say. It was the duchess, however, who spoke first,
saying:

“Now that we are alone, and that there is nobody here to overhear us, I
should be glad if the señor governor would relieve me of certain doubts
I have, rising out of the history of the great Don Quixote that is now
in print. One is: inasmuch as worthy Sancho never saw Dulcinea, I mean
the lady Dulcinea del Toboso, nor took Don Quixote’s letter to her, for
it was left in the memorandum book in the Sierra Morena, how did he
dare to invent the answer and all that about finding her sifting wheat,
the whole story being a deception and falsehood, and so much to the
prejudice of the peerless Dulcinea’s good name, a thing that is not at
all becoming the character and fidelity of a good squire?”



p33b.jpg (326K)

Full Size



At these words, Sancho, without uttering one in reply, got up from his
chair, and with noiseless steps, with his body bent and his finger on
his lips, went all round the room lifting up the hangings; and this
done, he came back to his seat and said, “Now, señora, that I have seen
that there is no one except the bystanders listening to us on the sly,
I will answer what you have asked me, and all you may ask me, without
fear or dread. And the first thing I have got to say is, that for my
own part I hold my master Don Quixote to be stark mad, though sometimes
he says things that, to my mind, and indeed everybody’s that