to Granada, señor,” said the gentleman, “to my own
country.”

“And a goodly country,” said Don Quixote; “but will your worship do me
the favour of telling me your name, for it strikes me it is of more
importance to me to know it than I can tell you.”

“My name is Don Álvaro Tarfe,” replied the traveller.

To which Don Quixote returned, “I have no doubt whatever that your
worship is that Don Álvaro Tarfe who appears in print in the Second
Part of the history of Don Quixote of La Mancha, lately printed and
published by a new author.”

“I am the same,” replied the gentleman; “and that same Don Quixote, the
principal personage in the said history, was a very great friend of
mine, and it was I who took him away from home, or at least induced him
to come to some jousts that were to be held at Saragossa, whither I was
going myself; indeed, I showed him many kindnesses, and saved him from
having his shoulders touched up by the executioner because of his
extreme rashness.”

“Tell me, Señor Don Álvaro,” said Don Quixote, “am I at all like that
Don Quixote you talk of?”

“No indeed,” replied the traveller, “not a bit.”

“And that Don Quixote—” said our one, “had he with him a squire called
Sancho Panza?”

“He had,” said Don Álvaro; “but though he had the name of being very
droll, I never heard him say anything that had any drollery in it.”

“That I can well believe,” said Sancho at this, “for to come out with
drolleries is not in everybody’s line; and that Sancho your worship
speaks of, gentle sir, must be some great scoundrel, dunderhead, and
thief, all in one; for I am the real Sancho Panza, and I have more
drolleries than if it rained them; let your worship only try; come
along with me for a year or so, and you will find they fall from me at
every turn, and so rich and so plentiful that though mostly I don’t
know what I am saying I make everybody that hears me laugh. And the
real Don Quixote of La Mancha, the famous, the valiant, the wise, the
lover, the righter of wrongs, the guardian of minors and orphans, the
protector of widows, the killer of damsels, he who has for his sole
mistress the peerless Dulcinea del Toboso, is this gentleman before
you, my master; all other Don Quixotes and all other Sancho Panzas are
dreams and mockeries.”

“By God I believe it,” said Don Álvaro; “for you have uttered more
drolleries, my friend, in the few words you have spoken than the other
Sancho Panza in all I ever heard from him, and they were not a few. He
was more greedy than well-spoken, and more dull than droll; and I am
convinced that the enchanters who persecute Don Quixote the Good have
been trying to persecute me with Don Quixote the Bad. But I don’t know
what to say, for I am ready to swear I left him shut up in the Casa del
Nuncio at Toledo, and here another Don Quixote turns up, though a very
different one from mine.”

“I don’t know whether I am good,” said Don Quixote, “but I can safely
say I am not ‘the Bad;’ and to prove it, let me tell you, Señor Don
Álvaro Tarfe, I have never in my life been in Saragossa; so far from
that, when it was told me that this imaginary Don Quixote had been
present at the jousts in that city, I declined to enter it, in order to
drag his falsehood before the face of the world; and so I went on
straight to Barcelona, the treasure-house of courtesy, haven of
strangers, asylum of the poor, home of the valiant, champion of the
wronged, pleasant exchange of firm friendships, and city unrivalled in
site and beauty. And though the adventures that befell me there are not
by any means matters of enjoyment, but rather of regret, I do not
regret them, simply because I have seen it. In a word, Señor Don Álvaro
Tarfe, I am Don Quixote of La Mancha, the one that fame speaks of, and
not the unlucky one that has attempted to usurp my name and deck
himself out in my ideas. I entreat your worship by your devoir as a
gentleman to be so good as to make a d