nte’s girths well, and wait here, for I shall come
back shortly, alive or dead.”

Sancho perceiving it his master’s final resolve, and how little his
tears, counsels, and entreaties prevailed with him, determined to have
recourse to his own ingenuity and compel him, if he could, to wait till
daylight; and so, while tightening the girths of the horse, he quietly
and without being felt, with his ass’ halter tied both Rocinante’s
legs, so that when Don Quixote strove to go he was unable as the horse
could only move by jumps. Seeing the success of his trick, Sancho Panza
said:

“See there, señor! Heaven, moved by my tears and prayers, has so
ordered it that Rocinante cannot stir; and if you will be obstinate,
and spur and strike him, you will only provoke fortune, and kick, as
they say, against the pricks.”

Don Quixote at this grew desperate, but the more he drove his heels
into the horse, the less he stirred him; and not having any suspicion
of the tying, he was fain to resign himself and wait till daybreak or
until Rocinante could move, firmly persuaded that all this came of
something other than Sancho’s ingenuity. So he said to him, “As it is
so, Sancho, and as Rocinante cannot move, I am content to wait till
dawn smiles upon us, even though I weep while it delays its coming.”

“There is no need to weep,” answered Sancho, “for I will amuse your
worship by telling stories from this till daylight, unless indeed you
like to dismount and lie down to sleep a little on the green grass
after the fashion of knights-errant, so as to be fresher when day comes
and the moment arrives for attempting this extraordinary adventure you
are looking forward to.”

“What art thou talking about dismounting or sleeping for?” said Don
Quixote. “Am I, thinkest thou, one of those knights that take their
rest in the presence of danger? Sleep thou who art born to sleep, or do
as thou wilt, for I will act as I think most consistent with my
character.”

“Be not angry, master mine,” replied Sancho, “I did not mean to say
that;” and coming close to him he laid one hand on the pommel of the
saddle and the other on the cantle so that he held his master’s left
thigh in his embrace, not daring to separate a finger’s width from him;
so much afraid was he of the strokes which still resounded with a
regular beat. Don Quixote bade him tell some story to amuse him as he
had proposed, to which Sancho replied that he would if his dread of
what he heard would let him; “Still,” said he, “I will strive to tell a
story which, if I can manage to relate it, and nobody interferes with
the telling, is the best of stories, and let your worship give me your
attention, for here I begin. What was, was; and may the good that is to
come be for all, and the evil for him who goes to look for it—your
worship must know that the beginning the old folk used to put to their
tales was not just as each one pleased; it was a maxim of Cato
Zonzorino the Roman, that says ‘the evil for him that goes to look for
it,’ and it comes as pat to the purpose now as ring to finger, to show
that your worship should keep quiet and not go looking for evil in any
quarter, and that we should go back by some other road, since nobody
forces us to follow this in which so many terrors affright us.”

“Go on with thy story, Sancho,” said Don Quixote, “and leave the choice
of our road to my care.”

“I say then,” continued Sancho, “that in a village of Estremadura there
was a goat-shepherd—that is to say, one who tended goats—which shepherd
or goatherd, as my story goes, was called Lope Ruiz, and this Lope Ruiz
was in love with a shepherdess called Torralva, which shepherdess
called Torralva was the daughter of a rich grazier, and this rich
grazier—”

“If that is the way thou tellest thy tale, Sancho,” said Don Quixote,
“repeating twice all thou hast to say, thou wilt not have done these
two days; go straight on with it, and tell it like a reasonab