ine you will
give me my liberty; for you would have never exposed yourselves to the
danger of depriving me of it only to restore it to me so generously,
especially as you know who I am and the sum you may expect to receive
on restoring it; and if you will only name that, I here offer you all
you require for myself and for my unhappy daughter there; or else for
her alone, for she is the greatest and most precious part of my soul.”

As he said this he began to weep so bitterly that he filled us all with
compassion and forced Zoraida to look at him, and when she saw him
weeping she was so moved that she rose from my feet and ran to throw
her arms round him, and pressing her face to his, they both gave way to
such an outburst of tears that several of us were constrained to keep
them company.

But when her father saw her in full dress and with all her jewels about
her, he said to her in his own language, “What means this, my daughter?
Last night, before this terrible misfortune in which we are plunged
befell us, I saw thee in thy everyday and indoor garments; and now,
without having had time to attire thyself, and without my bringing thee
any joyful tidings to furnish an occasion for adorning and bedecking
thyself, I see thee arrayed in the finest attire it would be in my
power to give thee when fortune was most kind to us. Answer me this;
for it causes me greater anxiety and surprise than even this misfortune
itself.”

The renegade interpreted to us what the Moor said to his daughter; she,
however, returned him no answer. But when he observed in one corner of
the vessel the little trunk in which she used to keep her jewels, which
he well knew he had left in Algiers and had not brought to the garden,
he was still more amazed, and asked her how that trunk had come into
our hands, and what there was in it. To which the renegade, without
waiting for Zoraida to reply, made answer, “Do not trouble thyself by
asking thy daughter Zoraida so many questions, señor, for the one
answer I will give thee will serve for all; I would have thee know that
she is a Christian, and that it is she who has been the file for our
chains and our deliverer from captivity. She is here of her own free
will, as glad, I imagine, to find herself in this position as he who
escapes from darkness into the light, from death to life, and from
suffering to glory.”

“Daughter, is this true, what he says?” cried the Moor.

“It is,” replied Zoraida.

“That thou art in truth a Christian,” said the old man, “and that thou
hast given thy father into the power of his enemies?”

To which Zoraida made answer, “A Christian I am, but it is not I who
have placed thee in this position, for it never was my wish to leave
thee or do thee harm, but only to do good to myself.”

“And what good hast thou done thyself, daughter?” said he.

“Ask thou that,” said she, “of Lela Marien, for she can tell thee
better than I.”

The Moor had hardly heard these words when with marvellous quickness he
flung himself headforemost into the sea, where no doubt he would have
been drowned had not the long and full dress he wore held him up for a
little on the surface of the water. Zoraida cried aloud to us to save
him, and we all hastened to help, and seizing him by his robe we drew
him in half drowned and insensible, at which Zoraida was in such
distress that she wept over him as piteously and bitterly as though he
were already dead. We turned him upon his face and he voided a great
quantity of water, and at the end of two hours came to himself.
Meanwhile, the wind having changed we were compelled to head for the
land, and ply our oars to avoid being driven on shore; but it was our
good fortune to reach a creek that lies on one side of a small
promontory or cape, called by the Moors that of the “Cava rumia,” which
in our language means “the wicked Christian woman;” for it is a
tradition among them that La Cava, through whom Spain was