 shall be roaming. But what is most needful, sirs, is that each
of us should choose the name of the shepherdess he means to glorify in
his verses, and that we should not leave a tree, be it ever so hard,
without writing up and carving her name on it, as is the habit and
custom of love-smitten shepherds.”

“That’s the very thing,” said Don Quixote; “though I am relieved from
looking for the name of an imaginary shepherdess, for there’s the
peerless Dulcinea del Toboso, the glory of these brooksides, the
ornament of these meadows, the mainstay of beauty, the cream of all the
graces, and, in a word, the being to whom all praise is appropriate, be
it ever so hyperbolical.”

“Very true,” said the curate; “but we the others must look about for
accommodating shepherdesses that will answer our purpose one way or
another.”

“And,” added Samson Carrasco, “if they fail us, we can call them by the
names of the ones in print that the world is filled with, Fílidas,
Amarilises, Dianas, Fleridas, Galateas, Belisardas; for as they sell
them in the market-places we may fairly buy them and make them our own.
If my lady, or I should say my shepherdess, happens to be called Ana,
I’ll sing her praises under the name of Anarda, and if Francisca, I’ll
call her Francenia, and if Lucia, Lucinda, for it all comes to the same
thing; and Sancho Panza, if he joins this fraternity, may glorify his
wife Teresa Panza as Teresaina.”

Don Quixote laughed at the adaptation of the name, and the curate
bestowed vast praise upon the worthy and honourable resolution he had
made, and again offered to bear him company all the time that he could
spare from his imperative duties. And so they took their leave of him,
recommending and beseeching him to take care of his health and treat
himself to a suitable diet.

It so happened his niece and the housekeeper overheard all the three of
them said; and as soon as they were gone they both of them came in to
Don Quixote, and said the niece, “What’s this, uncle? Now that we were
thinking you had come back to stay at home and lead a quiet respectable
life there, are you going to get into fresh entanglements, and turn
‘young shepherd, thou that comest here, young shepherd going there?’
Nay! indeed ‘the straw is too hard now to make pipes of.’”

“And,” added the housekeeper, “will your worship be able to bear, out
in the fields, the heats of summer, and the chills of winter, and the
howling of the wolves? Not you; for that’s a life and a business for
hardy men, bred and seasoned to such work almost from the time they
were in swaddling-clothes. Why, to make choice of evils, it’s better to
be a knight-errant than a shepherd! Look here, señor; take my
advice—and I’m not giving it to you full of bread and wine, but
fasting, and with fifty years upon my head—stay at home, look after
your affairs, go often to confession, be good to the poor, and upon my
soul be it if any evil comes to you.”

“Hold your peace, my daughters,” said Don Quixote; “I know very well
what my duty is; help me to bed, for I don’t feel very well; and rest
assured that, knight-errant now or wandering shepherd to be, I shall
never fail to have a care for your interests, as you will see in the
end.” And the good wenches (for that they undoubtedly were), the
housekeeper and niece, helped him to bed, where they gave him something
to eat and made him as comfortable as possible.



CHAPTER LXXIV.
OF HOW DON QUIXOTE FELL SICK, AND OF THE WILL HE MADE, AND HOW HE DIED




p74a.jpg (96K)

Full Size



As nothing that is man’s can last for ever, but all tends ever
downwards from its beginning to its end, and above all man’s life, and
as Don Quixote’s enjoyed no special dispensation from heaven to stay
its course, its end and close came when he least looked for it.
For—whether it was of the dejection the thought of his defeat produced,
or of heaven’s will that so ordered it—a fever settled upon hi