 I do that there is no sort of office of any importance that is
not obtained by a bribe of some kind, great or small; well then, that
which I look to receive for this government is that you go with your
master Don Quixote, and bring this memorable adventure to a conclusion;
and whether you return on Clavileño as quickly as his speed seems to
promise, or adverse fortune brings you back on foot travelling as a
pilgrim from hostel to hostel and from inn to inn, you will always find
your island on your return where you left it, and your islanders with
the same eagerness they have always had to receive you as their
governor, and my good-will will remain the same; doubt not the truth of
this, Señor Sancho, for that would be grievously wronging my
disposition to serve you.”

“Say no more, señor,” said Sancho; “I am a poor squire and not equal to
carrying so much courtesy; let my master mount; bandage my eyes and
commit me to God’s care, and tell me if I may commend myself to our
Lord or call upon the angels to protect me when we go towering up
there.”

To this the Trifaldi made answer, “Sancho, you may freely commend
yourself to God or whom you will; for Malambruno though an enchanter is
a Christian, and works his enchantments with great circumspection,
taking very good care not to fall out with anyone.”

“Well then,” said Sancho, “God and the most holy Trinity of Gaeta give
me help!”

“Since the memorable adventure of the fulling mills,” said Don Quixote,
“I have never seen Sancho in such a fright as now; were I as
superstitious as others his abject fear would cause me some little
trepidation of spirit. But come here, Sancho, for with the leave of
these gentles I would say a word or two to thee in private;” and
drawing Sancho aside among the trees of the garden and seizing both his
hands he said, “Thou seest, brother Sancho, the long journey we have
before us, and God knows when we shall return, or what leisure or
opportunities this business will allow us; I wish thee therefore to
retire now to thy chamber, as though thou wert going to fetch something
required for the road, and in a trice give thyself if it be only five
hundred lashes on account of the three thousand three hundred to which
thou art bound; it will be all to the good, and to make a beginning
with a thing is to have it half finished.”

“By God,” said Sancho, “but your worship must be out of your senses!
This is like the common saying, ‘You see me with child, and you want me
a virgin.’ Just as I’m about to go sitting on a bare board, your
worship would have me score my backside! Indeed, your worship is not
reasonable. Let us be off to shave these duennas; and on our return I
promise on my word to make such haste to wipe off all that’s due as
will satisfy your worship; I can’t say more.”

“Well, I will comfort myself with that promise, my good Sancho,”
replied Don Quixote, “and I believe thou wilt keep it; for indeed
though stupid thou art veracious.”

“I’m not voracious,” said Sancho, “only peckish; but even if I was a
little, still I’d keep my word.”

With this they went back to mount Clavileño, and as they were about to
do so Don Quixote said, “Cover thine eyes, Sancho, and mount; for one
who sends for us from lands so far distant cannot mean to deceive us
for the sake of the paltry glory to be derived from deceiving persons
who trust in him; though all should turn out the contrary of what I
hope, no malice will be able to dim the glory of having undertaken this
exploit.”

“Let us be off, señor,” said Sancho, “for I have taken the beards and
tears of these ladies deeply to heart, and I shan’t eat a bit to relish
it until I have seen them restored to their former smoothness. Mount,
your worship, and blindfold yourself, for if I am to go on the croup,
it is plain the rider in the saddle must mount first.”

“That is true,” said Don Quixote, and, taking a handkerchief out of his
pocket, he begged the 