knight.”

To which our Don Quixote made answer, “Sir, one solitary swallow does
not make summer; moreover, I know that knight was in secret very deeply
in love; besides which, that way of falling in love with all that took
his fancy was a natural propensity which he could not control. But, in
short, it is very manifest that he had one alone whom he made mistress
of his will, to whom he commended himself very frequently and very
secretly, for he prided himself on being a reticent knight.”

“Then if it be essential that every knight-errant should be in love,”
said the traveller, “it may be fairly supposed that your worship is so,
as you are of the order; and if you do not pride yourself on being as
reticent as Don Galaor, I entreat you as earnestly as I can, in the
name of all this company and in my own, to inform us of the name,
country, rank, and beauty of your lady, for she will esteem herself
fortunate if all the world knows that she is loved and served by such a
knight as your worship seems to be.”

At this Don Quixote heaved a deep sigh and said, “I cannot say
positively whether my sweet enemy is pleased or not that the world
should know I serve her; I can only say in answer to what has been so
courteously asked of me, that her name is Dulcinea, her country El
Toboso, a village of La Mancha, her rank must be at least that of a
princess, since she is my queen and lady, and her beauty superhuman,
since all the impossible and fanciful attributes of beauty which the
poets apply to their ladies are verified in her; for her hairs are
gold, her forehead Elysian fields, her eyebrows rainbows, her eyes
suns, her cheeks roses, her lips coral, her teeth pearls, her neck
alabaster, her bosom marble, her hands ivory, her fairness snow, and
what modesty conceals from sight such, I think and imagine, as rational
reflection can only extol, not compare.”

“We should like to know her lineage, race, and ancestry,” said Vivaldo.

To which Don Quixote replied, “She is not of the ancient Roman Curtii,
Caii, or Scipios, nor of the modern Colonnas or Orsini, nor of the
Moncadas or Requesenes of Catalonia, nor yet of the Rebellas or
Villanovas of Valencia; Palafoxes, Nuzas, Rocabertis, Corellas, Lunas,
Alagones, Urreas, Foces, or Gurreas of Aragon; Cerdas, Manriques,
Mendozas, or Guzmans of Castile; Alencastros, Pallas, or Meneses of
Portugal; but she is of those of El Toboso of La Mancha, a lineage that
though modern, may furnish a source of gentle blood for the most
illustrious families of the ages that are to come, and this let none
dispute with me save on the condition that Zerbino placed at the foot
of the trophy of Orlando’s arms, saying,

    These let none move
    Who dareth not his might with Roland prove.”


“Although mine is of the Cachopins of Laredo,” said the traveller, “I
will not venture to compare it with that of El Toboso of La Mancha,
though, to tell the truth, no such surname has until now ever reached
my ears.”

“What!” said Don Quixote, “has that never reached them?”

The rest of the party went along listening with great attention to the
conversation of the pair, and even the very goatherds and shepherds
perceived how exceedingly out of his wits our Don Quixote was. Sancho
Panza alone thought that what his master said was the truth, knowing
who he was and having known him from his birth; and all that he felt
any difficulty in believing was that about the fair Dulcinea del
Toboso, because neither any such name nor any such princess had ever
come to his knowledge though he lived so close to El Toboso. They were
going along conversing in this way, when they saw descending a gap
between two high mountains some twenty shepherds, all clad in
sheepskins of black wool, and crowned with garlands which, as
afterwards appeared, were, some of them of yew, some of cypress. Six of
the number were carrying a bier covered with a great variety of flowers
and branches, on 