d wages were so miserable and scanty that
half went in paying for the starching of one’s collars; it would be a
miracle indeed if a page volunteer ever got anything like a reasonable
bounty.”

“And tell me, for heaven’s sake,” asked Don Quixote, “is it possible,
my friend, that all the time you served you never got any livery?”

“They gave me two,” replied the page; “but just as when one quits a
religious community before making profession, they strip him of the
dress of the order and give him back his own clothes, so did my masters
return me mine; for as soon as the business on which they came to court
was finished, they went home and took back the liveries they had given
merely for show.”

“What spilorceria!—as an Italian would say,” said Don Quixote; “but for
all that, consider yourself happy in having left court with as worthy
an object as you have, for there is nothing on earth more honourable or
profitable than serving, first of all God, and then one’s king and
natural lord, particularly in the profession of arms, by which, if not
more wealth, at least more honour is to be won than by letters, as I
have said many a time; for though letters may have founded more great
houses than arms, still those founded by arms have I know not what
superiority over those founded by letters, and a certain splendour
belonging to them that distinguishes them above all. And bear in mind
what I am now about to say to you, for it will be of great use and
comfort to you in time of trouble; it is, not to let your mind dwell on
the adverse chances that may befall you; for the worst of all is death,
and if it be a good death, the best of all is to die. They asked Julius
Cæsar, the valiant Roman emperor, what was the best death. He answered,
that which is unexpected, which comes suddenly and unforeseen; and
though he answered like a pagan, and one without the knowledge of the
true God, yet, as far as sparing our feelings is concerned, he was
right; for suppose you are killed in the first engagement or skirmish,
whether by a cannon ball or blown up by mine, what matters it? It is
only dying, and all is over; and according to Terence, a soldier shows
better dead in battle, than alive and safe in flight; and the good
soldier wins fame in proportion as he is obedient to his captains and
those in command over him. And remember, my son, that it is better for
the soldier to smell of gunpowder than of civet, and that if old age
should come upon you in this honourable calling, though you may be
covered with wounds and crippled and lame, it will not come upon you
without honour, and that such as poverty cannot lessen; especially now
that provisions are being made for supporting and relieving old and
disabled soldiers; for it is not right to deal with them after the
fashion of those who set free and get rid of their black slaves when
they are old and useless, and, turning them out of their houses under
the pretence of making them free, make them slaves to hunger, from
which they cannot expect to be released except by death. But for the
present I won’t say more than get ye up behind me on my horse as far as
the inn, and sup with me there, and to-morrow you shall pursue your
journey, and God give you as good speed as your intentions deserve.”

The page did not accept the invitation to mount, though he did that to
supper at the inn; and here they say Sancho said to himself, “God be
with you for a master; is it possible that a man who can say things so
many and so good as he has said just now, can say that he saw the
impossible absurdities he reports about the cave of Montesinos? Well,
well, we shall see.”

And now, just as night was falling, they reached the inn, and it was
not without satisfaction that Sancho perceived his master took it for a
real inn, and not for a castle as usual. The instant they entered Don
Quixote asked the landlord after the man with the lances and halberds,
and was told th