her excellence will grant me leave I will go and kiss them in person
and place myself at her service for aught that may be in my power and
her highness may command; and mind, Sancho, how thou speakest, and take
care not to thrust in any of thy proverbs into thy message.”



p30b.jpg (334K)

Full Size



“You’ve got a likely one here to thrust any in!” said Sancho; “leave me
alone for that! Why, this is not the first time in my life I have
carried messages to high and exalted ladies.”

“Except that thou didst carry to the lady Dulcinea,” said Don Quixote,
“I know not that thou hast carried any other, at least in my service.”

“That is true,” replied Sancho; “but pledges don’t distress a good
payer, and in a house where there’s plenty supper is soon cooked; I
mean there’s no need of telling or warning me about anything; for I’m
ready for everything and know a little of everything.”

“That I believe, Sancho,” said Don Quixote; “go and good luck to thee,
and God speed thee.”

Sancho went off at top speed, forcing Dapple out of his regular pace,
and came to where the fair huntress was standing, and dismounting knelt
before her and said, “Fair lady, that knight that you see there, the
Knight of the Lions by name, is my master, and I am a squire of his,
and at home they call me Sancho Panza. This same Knight of the Lions,
who was called not long since the Knight of the Rueful Countenance,
sends by me to say may it please your highness to give him leave that,
with your permission, approbation, and consent, he may come and carry
out his wishes, which are, as he says and I believe, to serve your
exalted loftiness and beauty; and if you give it, your ladyship will do
a thing which will redound to your honour, and he will receive a most
distinguished favour and happiness.”

“You have indeed, squire,” said the lady, “delivered your message with
all the formalities such messages require; rise up, for it is not right
that the squire of a knight so great as he of the Rueful Countenance,
of whom we have heard a great deal here, should remain on his knees;
rise, my friend, and bid your master welcome to the services of myself
and the duke my husband, in a country house we have here.”

Sancho got up, charmed as much by the beauty of the good lady as by her
high-bred air and her courtesy, but, above all, by what she had said
about having heard of his master, the Knight of the Rueful Countenance;
for if she did not call him Knight of the Lions it was no doubt because
he had so lately taken the name. “Tell me, brother squire,” asked the
duchess (whose title, however, is not known), “this master of yours, is
he not one of whom there is a history extant in print, called ‘The
Ingenious Gentleman, Don Quixote of La Mancha,’ who has for the lady of
his heart a certain Dulcinea del Toboso?”

“He is the same, señora,” replied Sancho; “and that squire of his who
figures, or ought to figure, in the said history under the name of
Sancho Panza, is myself, unless they have changed me in the cradle, I
mean in the press.”

“I am rejoiced at all this,” said the duchess; “go, brother Panza, and
tell your master that he is welcome to my estate, and that nothing
could happen to me that could give me greater pleasure.”

Sancho returned to his master mightily pleased with this gratifying
answer, and told him all the great lady had said to him, lauding to the
skies, in his rustic phrase, her rare beauty, her graceful gaiety, and
her courtesy. Don Quixote drew himself up briskly in his saddle, fixed
himself in his stirrups, settled his visor, gave Rocinante the spur,
and with an easy bearing advanced to kiss the hands of the duchess,
who, having sent to summon the duke her husband, told him while Don
Quixote was approaching all about the message; and as both of them had
read the First Part of this history, and from it were aware of Don
Quixote’s crazy turn, they awaited him with the greatest del