me, to order her squire to give up the saddle
of his mule to your worship, and he can sit behind if the beast will
bear it.”

“It will, I am sure,” said the princess, “and I am sure, too, that I
need not order my squire, for he is too courteous and considerate to
allow a Churchman to go on foot when he might be mounted.”

“That he is,” said the barber, and at once alighting, he offered his
saddle to the curate, who accepted it without much entreaty; but
unfortunately as the barber was mounting behind, the mule, being as it
happened a hired one, which is the same thing as saying
ill-conditioned, lifted its hind hoofs and let fly a couple of kicks in
the air, which would have made Master Nicholas wish his expedition in
quest of Don Quixote at the devil had they caught him on the breast or
head. As it was, they so took him by surprise that he came to the
ground, giving so little heed to his beard that it fell off, and all he
could do when he found himself without it was to cover his face hastily
with both his hands and moan that his teeth were knocked out. Don
Quixote when he saw all that bundle of beard detached, without jaws or
blood, from the face of the fallen squire, exclaimed:

“By the living God, but this is a great miracle! it has knocked off and
plucked away the beard from his face as if it had been shaved off
designedly.”

The curate, seeing the danger of discovery that threatened his scheme,
at once pounced upon the beard and hastened with it to where Master
Nicholas lay, still uttering moans, and drawing his head to his breast
had it on in an instant, muttering over him some words which he said
were a certain special charm for sticking on beards, as they would see;
and as soon as he had it fixed he left him, and the squire appeared
well bearded and whole as before, whereat Don Quixote was beyond
measure astonished, and begged the curate to teach him that charm when
he had an opportunity, as he was persuaded its virtue must extend
beyond the sticking on of beards, for it was clear that where the beard
had been stripped off the flesh must have remained torn and lacerated,
and when it could heal all that it must be good for more than beards.

“And so it is,” said the curate, and he promised to teach it to him on
the first opportunity. They then agreed that for the present the curate
should mount, and that the three should ride by turns until they
reached the inn, which might be about six leagues from where they were.

Three then being mounted, that is to say, Don Quixote, the princess,
and the curate, and three on foot, Cardenio, the barber, and Sancho
Panza, Don Quixote said to the damsel:

“Let your highness, lady, lead on whithersoever is most pleasing to
you;” but before she could answer the licentiate said:



c29d.jpg (345K)

Full Size




“Towards what kingdom would your ladyship direct our course? Is it
perchance towards that of Micomicon? It must be, or else I know little
about kingdoms.”

She, being ready on all points, understood that she was to answer
“Yes,” so she said “Yes, señor, my way lies towards that kingdom.”

“In that case,” said the curate, “we must pass right through my
village, and there your worship will take the road to Cartagena, where
you will be able to embark, fortune favouring; and if the wind be fair
and the sea smooth and tranquil, in somewhat less than nine years you
may come in sight of the great lake Meona, I mean Meotides, which is
little more than a hundred days’ journey this side of your highness’s
kingdom.”



c29e.jpg (318K)

Full Size




“Your worship is mistaken, señor,” said she; “for it is not two years
since I set out from it, and though I never had good weather,
nevertheless I am here to behold what I so longed for, and that is my
lord Don Quixote of La Mancha, whose fame came to my ears as soon as I
set foot in Spain and impelled me to go in search of him, to commend
myself to his cour