on or the other out of his imagination,
and to all he assigned off-hand their arms, colours, devices, and
mottoes, carried away by the illusions of his unheard-of craze; and
without a pause, he continued, “People of divers nations compose this
squadron in front; here are those that drink of the sweet waters of the
famous Xanthus, those that scour the woody Massilian plains, those that
sift the pure fine gold of Arabia Felix, those that enjoy the famed
cool banks of the crystal Thermodon, those that in many and various
ways divert the streams of the golden Pactolus, the Numidians,
faithless in their promises, the Persians renowned in archery, the
Parthians and the Medes that fight as they fly, the Arabs that ever
shift their dwellings, the Scythians as cruel as they are fair, the
Ethiopians with pierced lips, and an infinity of other nations whose
features I recognise and descry, though I cannot recall their names. In
this other squadron there come those that drink of the crystal streams
of the olive-bearing Betis, those that make smooth their countenances
with the water of the ever rich and golden Tagus, those that rejoice in
the fertilising flow of the divine Genil, those that roam the Tartesian
plains abounding in pasture, those that take their pleasure in the
Elysian meadows of Jerez, the rich Manchegans crowned with ruddy ears
of corn, the wearers of iron, old relics of the Gothic race, those that
bathe in the Pisuerga renowned for its gentle current, those that feed
their herds along the spreading pastures of the winding Guadiana famed
for its hidden course, those that tremble with the cold of the pineclad
Pyrenees or the dazzling snows of the lofty Apennine; in a word, as
many as all Europe includes and contains.”

Good God! what a number of countries and nations he named! giving to
each its proper attributes with marvellous readiness; brimful and
saturated with what he had read in his lying books! Sancho Panza hung
upon his words without speaking, and from time to time turned to try if
he could see the knights and giants his master was describing, and as
he could not make out one of them he said to him:

“Señor, devil take it if there’s a sign of any man you talk of, knight
or giant, in the whole thing; maybe it’s all enchantment, like the
phantoms last night.”

“How canst thou say that!” answered Don Quixote; “dost thou not hear
the neighing of the steeds, the braying of the trumpets, the roll of
the drums?”

“I hear nothing but a great bleating of ewes and sheep,” said Sancho;
which was true, for by this time the two flocks had come close.

“The fear thou art in, Sancho,” said Don Quixote, “prevents thee from
seeing or hearing correctly, for one of the effects of fear is to
derange the senses and make things appear different from what they are;
if thou art in such fear, withdraw to one side and leave me to myself,
for alone I suffice to bring victory to that side to which I shall give
my aid;” and so saying he gave Rocinante the spur, and putting the
lance in rest, shot down the slope like a thunderbolt. Sancho shouted
after him, crying, “Come back, Señor Don Quixote; I vow to God they are
sheep and ewes you are charging! Come back! Unlucky the father that
begot me! what madness is this! Look, there is no giant, nor knight,
nor cats, nor arms, nor shields quartered or whole, nor vair azure or
bedevilled. What are you about? Sinner that I am before God!” But not
for all these entreaties did Don Quixote turn back; on the contrary he
went on shouting out, “Ho, knights, ye who follow and fight under the
banners of the valiant emperor Pentapolin of the Bare Arm, follow me
all; ye shall see how easily I shall give him his revenge over his
enemy Alifanfaron of the Trapobana.”

So saying, he dashed into the midst of the squadron of ewes, and began
spearing them with as much spirit and intrepidity as if he were
transfixing mortal enemies in earnest. The shepherds