s bits of their bones, and enrich and adorn their
oratories and favourite altars with them.”

“What wouldst thou have me infer from all thou hast said, Sancho?”
asked Don Quixote.

“My meaning is,” said Sancho, “let us set about becoming saints, and we
shall obtain more quickly the fair fame we are striving after; for you
know, señor, yesterday or the day before yesterday (for it is so lately
one may say so) they canonised and beatified two little barefoot
friars, and it is now reckoned the greatest good luck to kiss or touch
the iron chains with which they girt and tortured their bodies, and
they are held in greater veneration, so it is said, than the sword of
Roland in the armoury of our lord the King, whom God preserve. So that,
señor, it is better to be an humble little friar of no matter what
order, than a valiant knight-errant; with God a couple of dozen of
penance lashings are of more avail than two thousand lance-thrusts, be
they given to giants, or monsters, or dragons.”

“All that is true,” returned Don Quixote, “but we cannot all be friars,
and many are the ways by which God takes his own to heaven; chivalry is
a religion, there are sainted knights in glory.”

“Yes,” said Sancho, “but I have heard say that there are more friars in
heaven than knights-errant.”

“That,” said Don Quixote, “is because those in religious orders are
more numerous than knights.”

“The errants are many,” said Sancho.

“Many,” replied Don Quixote, “but few they who deserve the name of
knights.”

With these, and other discussions of the same sort, they passed that
night and the following day, without anything worth mention happening
to them, whereat Don Quixote was not a little dejected; but at length
the next day, at daybreak, they descried the great city of El Toboso,
at the sight of which Don Quixote’s spirits rose and Sancho’s fell, for
he did not know Dulcinea’s house, nor in all his life had he ever seen
her, any more than his master; so that they were both uneasy, the one
to see her, the other at not having seen her, and Sancho was at a loss
to know what he was to do when his master sent him to El Toboso. In the
end, Don Quixote made up his mind to enter the city at nightfall, and
they waited until the time came among some oak trees that were near El
Toboso; and when the moment they had agreed upon arrived, they made
their entrance into the city, where something happened them that may
fairly be called something.



p08e.jpg (49K)

Full Size



CHAPTER IX.
WHEREIN IS RELATED WHAT WILL BE SEEN THERE




p09a.jpg (79K)

Full Size



’Twas at the very midnight hour—more or less—when Don Quixote and
Sancho quitted the wood and entered El Toboso. The town was in deep
silence, for all the inhabitants were asleep, and stretched on the
broad of their backs, as the saying is. The night was darkish, though
Sancho would have been glad had it been quite dark, so as to find in
the darkness an excuse for his blundering. All over the place nothing
was to be heard except the barking of dogs, which deafened the ears of
Don Quixote and troubled the heart of Sancho. Now and then an ass
brayed, pigs grunted, cats mewed, and the various noises they made
seemed louder in the silence of the night; all which the enamoured
knight took to be of evil omen; nevertheless he said to Sancho,
“Sancho, my son, lead on to the palace of Dulcinea, it may be that we
shall find her awake.”

“Body of the sun! what palace am I to lead to,” said Sancho, “when what
I saw her highness in was only a very little house?”

“Most likely she had then withdrawn into some small apartment of her
palace,” said Don Quixote, “to amuse herself with damsels, as great
ladies and princesses are accustomed to do.”

“Señor,” said Sancho, “if your worship will have it in spite of me that
the house of my lady Dulcinea is a palace, is this an hour, think you,
to find the door open; and will it be right for us