houghts had not been so full of Don
Luis’s affair, would have helped to carry on the joke; but he was so
taken up with the serious matters he had on his mind that he paid
little or no attention to these facetious proceedings.

“God bless me!” exclaimed their butt the barber at this; “is it
possible that such an honourable company can say that this is not a
basin but a helmet? Why, this is a thing that would astonish a whole
university, however wise it might be! That will do; if this basin is a
helmet, why, then the pack-saddle must be a horse’s caparison, as this
gentleman has said.”

“To me it looks like a pack-saddle,” said Don Quixote; “but I have
already said that with that question I do not concern myself.”

“As to whether it be pack-saddle or caparison,” said the curate, “it is
only for Señor Don Quixote to say; for in these matters of chivalry all
these gentlemen and I bow to his authority.”

“By God, gentlemen,” said Don Quixote, “so many strange things have
happened to me in this castle on the two occasions on which I have
sojourned in it, that I will not venture to assert anything positively
in reply to any question touching anything it contains; for it is my
belief that everything that goes on within it goes by enchantment. The
first time, an enchanted Moor that there is in it gave me sore trouble,
nor did Sancho fare well among certain followers of his; and last night
I was kept hanging by this arm for nearly two hours, without knowing
how or why I came by such a mishap. So that now, for me to come forward
to give an opinion in such a puzzling matter, would be to risk a rash
decision. As regards the assertion that this is a basin and not a
helmet I have already given an answer; but as to the question whether
this is a pack-saddle or a caparison I will not venture to give a
positive opinion, but will leave it to your worships’ better judgment.
Perhaps as you are not dubbed knights like myself, the enchantments of
this place have nothing to do with you, and your faculties are
unfettered, and you can see things in this castle as they really and
truly are, and not as they appear to me.”

“There can be no question,” said Don Fernando on this, “but that Señor
Don Quixote has spoken very wisely, and that with us rests the decision
of this matter; and that we may have surer ground to go on, I will take
the votes of the gentlemen in secret, and declare the result clearly
and fully.”

To those who were in on the secret of Don Quixote’s humour all this
afforded great amusement; but to those who knew nothing about it, it
seemed the greatest nonsense in the world, in particular to the four
servants of Don Luis, as well as to Don Luis himself, and to three
other travellers who had by chance come to the inn, and had the
appearance of officers of the Holy Brotherhood, as indeed they were;
but the one who above all was at his wits’ end was the barber whose
basin, there before his very eyes, had been turned into Mambrino’s
helmet, and whose pack-saddle he had no doubt whatever was about to
become a rich caparison for a horse. All laughed to see Don Fernando
going from one to another collecting the votes, and whispering to them
to give him their private opinion whether the treasure over which there
had been so much fighting was a pack-saddle or a caparison; but after
he had taken the votes of those who knew Don Quixote, he said aloud,
“The fact is, my good fellow, that I am tired collecting such a number
of opinions, for I find that there is not one of whom I ask what I
desire to know, who does not tell me that it is absurd to say that this
is the pack-saddle of an ass, and not the caparison of a horse, nay, of
a thoroughbred horse; so you must submit, for, in spite of you and your
ass, this is a caparison and no pack-saddle, and you have stated and
proved your case very badly.”

“May I never share heaven,” said the poor barber, “if your worships are
not all mistaken;