en they read; for I swear to you in all
seriousness there never were any such knights in the world, and no such
exploits or nonsense ever happened anywhere.”

“Try that bone on another dog,” said the landlord; “as if I did not
know how many make five, and where my shoe pinches me; don’t think to
feed me with pap, for by God I am no fool. It is a good joke for your
worship to try and persuade me that everything these good books say is
nonsense and lies, and they printed by the license of the Lords of the
Royal Council, as if they were people who would allow such a lot of
lies to be printed all together, and so many battles and enchantments
that they take away one’s senses.”

“I have told you, friend,” said the curate, “that this is done to
divert our idle thoughts; and as in well-ordered states games of chess,
fives, and billiards are allowed for the diversion of those who do not
care, or are not obliged, or are unable to work, so books of this kind
are allowed to be printed, on the supposition that, what indeed is the
truth, there can be nobody so ignorant as to take any of them for true
stories; and if it were permitted me now, and the present company
desired it, I could say something about the qualities books of chivalry
should possess to be good ones, that would be to the advantage and even
to the taste of some; but I hope the time will come when I can
communicate my ideas to someone who may be able to mend matters; and in
the meantime, señor landlord, believe what I have said, and take your
books, and make up your mind about their truth or falsehood, and much
good may they do you; and God grant you may not fall lame of the same
foot your guest Don Quixote halts on.”

“No fear of that,” returned the landlord; “I shall not be so mad as to
make a knight-errant of myself; for I see well enough that things are
not now as they used to be in those days, when they say those famous
knights roamed about the world.”

Sancho had made his appearance in the middle of this conversation, and
he was very much troubled and cast down by what he heard said about
knights-errant being now no longer in vogue, and all books of chivalry
being folly and lies; and he resolved in his heart to wait and see what
came of this journey of his master’s, and if it did not turn out as
happily as his master expected, he determined to leave him and go back
to his wife and children and his ordinary labour.

The landlord was carrying away the valise and the books, but the curate
said to him, “Wait; I want to see what those papers are that are
written in such a good hand.” The landlord taking them out handed them
to him to read, and he perceived they were a work of about eight sheets
of manuscript, with, in large letters at the beginning, the title of
“Novel of the Ill-advised Curiosity.” The curate read three or four
lines to himself, and said, “I must say the title of this novel does
not seem to me a bad one, and I feel an inclination to read it all.” To
which the landlord replied, “Then your reverence will do well to read
it, for I can tell you that some guests who have read it here have been
much pleased with it, and have begged it of me very earnestly; but I
would not give it, meaning to return it to the person who forgot the
valise, books, and papers here, for maybe he will return here some time
or other; and though I know I shall miss the books, faith I mean to
return them; for though I am an innkeeper, still I am a Christian.”

“You are very right, friend,” said the curate; “but for all that, if
the novel pleases me you must let me copy it.”

“With all my heart,” replied the host.

While they were talking Cardenio had taken up the novel and begun to
read it, and forming the same opinion of it as the curate, he begged
him to read it so that they might all hear it.

“I would read it,” said the curate, “if the time would not be better
spent in sleeping.”

“It will be rest enough for me,” s