so that the name
“Dulcinea del Toboso” might be got into four ballad stanzas.

“It must be, by some means or other,” said Don Quixote, “for unless the
name stands there plain and manifest, no woman would believe the verses
were made for her.”

They agreed upon this, and that the departure should take place in
three days from that time. Don Quixote charged the bachelor to keep it
a secret, especially from the curate and Master Nicholas, and from his
niece and the housekeeper, lest they should prevent the execution of
his praiseworthy and valiant purpose. Carrasco promised all, and then
took his leave, charging Don Quixote to inform him of his good or evil
fortunes whenever he had an opportunity; and thus they bade each other
farewell, and Sancho went away to make the necessary preparations for
their expedition.



p04e.jpg (55K)



CHAPTER V.
OF THE SHREWD AND DROLL CONVERSATION THAT PASSED BETWEEN SANCHO PANZA
AND HIS WIFE TERESA PANZA, AND OTHER MATTERS WORTHY OF BEING DULY
RECORDED




p05a.jpg (129K)

Full Size



The translator of this history, when he comes to write this fifth
chapter, says that he considers it apocryphal, because in it Sancho
Panza speaks in a style unlike that which might have been expected from
his limited intelligence, and says things so subtle that he does not
think it possible he could have conceived them; however, desirous of
doing what his task imposed upon him, he was unwilling to leave it
untranslated, and therefore he went on to say:

Sancho came home in such glee and spirits that his wife noticed his
happiness a bowshot off, so much so that it made her ask him, “What
have you got, Sancho friend, that you are so glad?”

To which he replied, “Wife, if it were God’s will, I should be very
glad not to be so well pleased as I show myself.”

“I don’t understand you, husband,” said she, “and I don’t know what you
mean by saying you would be glad, if it were God’s will, not to be well
pleased; for, fool as I am, I don’t know how one can find pleasure in
not having it.”

“Hark ye, Teresa,” replied Sancho, “I am glad because I have made up my
mind to go back to the service of my master Don Quixote, who means to
go out a third time to seek for adventures; and I am going with him
again, for my necessities will have it so, and also the hope that
cheers me with the thought that I may find another hundred crowns like
those we have spent; though it makes me sad to have to leave thee and
the children; and if God would be pleased to let me have my daily
bread, dry-shod and at home, without taking me out into the byways and
cross-roads—and he could do it at small cost by merely willing it—it is
clear my happiness would be more solid and lasting, for the happiness I
have is mingled with sorrow at leaving thee; so that I was right in
saying I would be glad, if it were God’s will, not to be well pleased.”

“Look here, Sancho,” said Teresa; “ever since you joined on to a
knight-errant you talk in such a roundabout way that there is no
understanding you.”

“It is enough that God understands me, wife,” replied Sancho; “for he
is the understander of all things; that will do; but mind, sister, you
must look to Dapple carefully for the next three days, so that he may
be fit to take arms; double his feed, and see to the pack-saddle and
other harness, for it is not to a wedding we are bound, but to go round
the world, and play at give and take with giants and dragons and
monsters, and hear hissings and roarings and bellowings and howlings;
and even all this would be lavender, if we had not to reckon with
Yanguesans and enchanted Moors.”

“I know well enough, husband,” said Teresa, “that squires-errant don’t
eat their bread for nothing, and so I will be always praying to our
Lord to deliver you speedily from all that hard fortune.”

“I can tell you, wife,” said Sancho, “if I did not expect to see myself
governor of an island before long