 year.

It was as he journeyed from town to town collecting the king’s taxes,
that he noted down those bits of inn and wayside life and character
that abound in the pages of “Don Quixote:” the Benedictine monks with
spectacles and sunshades, mounted on their tall mules; the strollers in
costume bound for the next village; the barber with his basin on his
head, on his way to bleed a patient; the recruit with his breeches in
his bundle, tramping along the road singing; the reapers gathered in
the venta gateway listening to “Felixmarte of Hircania” read out to
them; and those little Hogarthian touches that he so well knew how to
bring in, the ox-tail hanging up with the landlord’s comb stuck in it,
the wine-skins at the bed-head, and those notable examples of hostelry
art, Helen going off in high spirits on Paris’s arm, and Dido on the
tower dropping tears as big as walnuts. Nay, it may well be that on
those journeys into remote regions he came across now and then a
specimen of the pauper gentleman, with his lean hack and his greyhound
and his books of chivalry, dreaming away his life in happy ignorance
that the world had changed since his great-grandfather’s old helmet was
new. But it was in Seville that he found out his true vocation, though
he himself would not by any means have admitted it to be so. It was
there, in Triana, that he was first tempted to try his hand at drawing
from life, and first brought his humour into play in the exquisite
little sketch of “Rinconete y Cortadillo,” the germ, in more ways than
one, of “Don Quixote.”

Where and when that was written, we cannot tell. After his imprisonment
all trace of Cervantes in his official capacity disappears, from which
it may be inferred that he was not reinstated. That he was still in
Seville in November 1598 appears from a satirical sonnet of his on the
elaborate catafalque erected to testify the grief of the city at the
death of Philip II, but from this up to 1603 we have no clue to his
movements. The words in the preface to the First Part of “Don Quixote”
are generally held to be conclusive that he conceived the idea of the
book, and wrote the beginning of it at least, in a prison, and that he
may have done so is extremely likely.

There is a tradition that Cervantes read some portions of his work to a
select audience at the Duke of Bejar’s, which may have helped to make
the book known; but the obvious conclusion is that the First Part of
“Don Quixote” lay on his hands some time before he could find a
publisher bold enough to undertake a venture of so novel a character;
and so little faith in it had Francisco Robles of Madrid, to whom at
last he sold it, that he did not care to incur the expense of securing
the copyright for Aragon or Portugal, contenting himself with that for
Castile. The printing was finished in December, and the book came out
with the new year, 1605. It is often said that “Don Quixote” was at
first received coldly. The facts show just the contrary. No sooner was
it in the hands of the public than preparations were made to issue
pirated editions at Lisbon and Valencia, and to bring out a second
edition with the additional copyrights for Aragon and Portugal, which
he secured in February.

No doubt it was received with something more than coldness by certain
sections of the community. Men of wit, taste, and discrimination among
the aristocracy gave it a hearty welcome, but the aristocracy in
general were not likely to relish a book that turned their favourite
reading into ridicule and laughed at so many of their favourite ideas.
The dramatists who gathered round Lope as their leader regarded
Cervantes as their common enemy, and it is plain that he was equally
obnoxious to the other clique, the culto poets who had Gongora for
their chief. Navarrete, who knew nothing of the letter above mentioned,
tries hard to show that the relations between Cervantes and Lope were
of a very friendly sort