ore than a thousand leagues away
from the place where he went to sleep. And if it were not for this,
knights-errant would not be able to give aid to one another in peril,
as they do at every turn. For a knight, maybe, is fighting in the
mountains of Armenia with some dragon, or fierce serpent, or another
knight, and gets the worst of the battle, and is at the point of death;
but when he least looks for it, there appears over against him on a
cloud, or chariot of fire, another knight, a friend of his, who just
before had been in England, and who takes his part, and delivers him
from death; and at night he finds himself in his own quarters supping
very much to his satisfaction; and yet from one place to the other will
have been two or three thousand leagues. And all this is done by the
craft and skill of the sage enchanters who take care of those valiant
knights; so that, friend Sancho, I find no difficulty in believing that
thou mayest have gone from this place to El Toboso and returned in such
a short time, since, as I have said, some friendly sage must have
carried thee through the air without thee perceiving it.”

“That must have been it,” said Sancho, “for indeed Rocinante went like
a gipsy’s ass with quicksilver in his ears.”

“Quicksilver!” said Don Quixote, “aye and what is more, a legion of
devils, folk that can travel and make others travel without being
weary, exactly as the whim seizes them. But putting this aside, what
thinkest thou I ought to do about my lady’s command to go and see her?
For though I feel that I am bound to obey her mandate, I feel too that
I am debarred by the boon I have accorded to the princess that
accompanies us, and the law of chivalry compels me to have regard for
my word in preference to my inclination; on the one hand the desire to
see my lady pursues and harasses me, on the other my solemn promise and
the glory I shall win in this enterprise urge and call me; but what I
think I shall do is to travel with all speed and reach quickly the
place where this giant is, and on my arrival I shall cut off his head,
and establish the princess peacefully in her realm, and forthwith I
shall return to behold the light that lightens my senses, to whom I
shall make such excuses that she will be led to approve of my delay,
for she will see that it entirely tends to increase her glory and fame;
for all that I have won, am winning, or shall win by arms in this life,
comes to me of the favour she extends to me, and because I am hers.”

“Ah! what a sad state your worship’s brains are in!” said Sancho. “Tell
me, señor, do you mean to travel all that way for nothing, and to let
slip and lose so rich and great a match as this where they give as a
portion a kingdom that in sober truth I have heard say is more than
twenty thousand leagues round about, and abounds with all things
necessary to support human life, and is bigger than Portugal and
Castile put together? Peace, for the love of God! Blush for what you
have said, and take my advice, and forgive me, and marry at once in the
first village where there is a curate; if not, here is our licentiate
who will do the business beautifully; remember, I am old enough to give
advice, and this I am giving comes pat to the purpose; for a sparrow in
the hand is better than a vulture on the wing, and he who has the good
to his hand and chooses the bad, that the good he complains of may not
come to him.”

“Look here, Sancho,” said Don Quixote. “If thou art advising me to
marry, in order that immediately on slaying the giant I may become
king, and be able to confer favours on thee, and give thee what I have
promised, let me tell thee I shall be able very easily to satisfy thy
desires without marrying; for before going into battle I will make it a
stipulation that, if I come out of it victorious, even I do not marry,
they shall give me a portion of the kingdom, that I may bestow it upon
whomsoever I choose, and when