nd
deeply pitted, those who love her say they are not pits that are there,
but the graves where the hearts of her lovers are buried. She is so
cleanly that not to soil her face she carries her nose turned up, as
they say, so that one would fancy it was running away from her mouth;
and with all this she looks extremely well, for she has a wide mouth;
and but for wanting ten or a dozen teeth and grinders she might compare
and compete with the comeliest. Of her lips I say nothing, for they are
so fine and thin that, if lips might be reeled, one might make a skein
of them; but being of a different colour from ordinary lips they are
wonderful, for they are mottled, blue, green, and purple—let my lord
the governor pardon me for painting so minutely the charms of her who
some time or other will be my daughter; for I love her, and I don’t
find her amiss.”

“Paint what you will,” said Sancho; “I enjoy your painting, and if I
had dined there could be no dessert more to my taste than your
portrait.”

“That I have still to furnish,” said the farmer; “but a time will come
when we may be able if we are not now; and I can tell you, señor, if I
could paint her gracefulness and her tall figure, it would astonish
you; but that is impossible because she is bent double with her knees
up to her mouth; but for all that it is easy to see that if she could
stand up she’d knock her head against the ceiling; and she would have
given her hand to my bachelor ere this, only that she can’t stretch it
out, for it’s contracted; but still one can see its elegance and fine
make by its long furrowed nails.”

“That will do, brother,” said Sancho; “consider you have painted her
from head to foot; what is it you want now? Come to the point without
all this beating about the bush, and all these scraps and additions.”

“I want your worship, señor,” said the farmer, “to do me the favour of
giving me a letter of recommendation to the girl’s father, begging him
to be so good as to let this marriage take place, as we are not
ill-matched either in the gifts of fortune or of nature; for to tell
the truth, señor governor, my son is possessed of a devil, and there is
not a day but the evil spirits torment him three or four times; and
from having once fallen into the fire, he has his face puckered up like
a piece of parchment, and his eyes watery and always running; but he
has the disposition of an angel, and if it was not for belabouring and
pummelling himself he’d be a saint.”

“Is there anything else you want, good man?” said Sancho.

“There’s another thing I’d like,” said the farmer, “but I’m afraid to
mention it; however, out it must; for after all I can’t let it be
rotting in my breast, come what may. I mean, señor, that I’d like your
worship to give me three hundred or six hundred ducats as a help to my
bachelor’s portion, to help him in setting up house; for they must, in
short, live by themselves, without being subject to the interferences
of their fathers-in-law.”

“Just see if there’s anything else you’d like,” said Sancho, “and don’t
hold back from mentioning it out of bashfulness or modesty.”

“No, indeed there is not,” said the farmer.

The moment he said this the governor started to his feet, and seizing
the chair he had been sitting on exclaimed, “By all that’s good, you
ill-bred, boorish Don Bumpkin, if you don’t get out of this at once and
hide yourself from my sight, I’ll lay your head open with this chair.
You whoreson rascal, you devil’s own painter, and is it at this hour
you come to ask me for six hundred ducats! How should I have them, you
stinking brute? And why should I give them to you if I had them, you
knave and blockhead? What have I to do with Miguelturra or the whole
family of the Perlerines? Get out I say, or by the life of my lord the
duke I’ll do as I said. You’re not from Miguelturra, but some knave
sent here from hell to tempt me. Why, you villain, I have not yet had
th