,” said the devil, “I never observed it,
for my mind is occupied with so many different things that I was
forgetting the main thing I came about.”

“This demon must be an honest fellow and a good Christian,” said
Sancho; “for if he wasn’t he wouldn’t swear by God and his conscience;
I feel sure now there must be good souls even in hell itself.”

Without dismounting, the demon then turned to Don Quixote and said,
“The unfortunate but valiant knight Montesinos sends me to thee, the
Knight of the Lions (would that I saw thee in their claws), bidding me
tell thee to wait for him wherever I may find thee, as he brings with
him her whom they call Dulcinea del Toboso, that he may show thee what
is needful in order to disenchant her; and as I came for no more I need
stay no longer; demons of my sort be with thee, and good angels with
these gentles;” and so saying he blew his huge horn, turned about and
went off without waiting for a reply from anyone.

They all felt fresh wonder, but particularly Sancho and Don Quixote;
Sancho to see how, in defiance of the truth, they would have it that
Dulcinea was enchanted; Don Quixote because he could not feel sure
whether what had happened to him in the cave of Montesinos was true or
not; and as he was deep in these cogitations the duke said to him, “Do
you mean to wait, Señor Don Quixote?”

“Why not?” replied he; “here will I wait, fearless and firm, though all
hell should come to attack me.”

“Well then, if I see another devil or hear another horn like the last,
I’ll wait here as much as in Flanders,” said Sancho.

Night now closed in more completely, and many lights began to flit
through the wood, just as those fiery exhalations from the earth, that
look like shooting-stars to our eyes, flit through the heavens; a
frightful noise, too, was heard, like that made by the solid wheels the
ox-carts usually have, by the harsh, ceaseless creaking of which, they
say, the bears and wolves are put to flight, if there happen to be any
where they are passing. In addition to all this commotion, there came a
further disturbance to increase the tumult, for now it seemed as if in
truth, on all four sides of the wood, four encounters or battles were
going on at the same time; in one quarter resounded the dull noise of a
terrible cannonade, in another numberless muskets were being
discharged, the shouts of the combatants sounded almost close at hand,
and farther away the Moorish lelilies were raised again and again. In a
word, the bugles, the horns, the clarions, the trumpets, the drums, the
cannon, the musketry, and above all the tremendous noise of the carts,
all made up together a din so confused and terrific that Don Quixote
had need to summon up all his courage to brave it; but Sancho’s gave
way, and he fell fainting on the skirt of the duchess’s robe, who let
him lie there and promptly bade them throw water in his face. This was
done, and he came to himself by the time that one of the carts with the
creaking wheels reached the spot. It was drawn by four plodding oxen
all covered with black housings; on each horn they had fixed a large
lighted wax taper, and on the top of the cart was constructed a raised
seat, on which sat a venerable old man with a beard whiter than the
very snow, and so long that it fell below his waist; he was dressed in
a long robe of black buckram; for as the cart was thickly set with a
multitude of candles it was easy to make out everything that was on it.
Leading it were two hideous demons, also clad in buckram, with
countenances so frightful that Sancho, having once seen them, shut his
eyes so as not to see them again. As soon as the cart came opposite the
spot the old man rose from his lofty seat, and standing up said in a
loud voice, “I am the sage Lirgandeo,” and without another word the
cart then passed on. Behind it came another of the same form, with
another aged man enthroned, who, stopping the cart, said in a