 and drovers
accompanying the flock shouted to him to desist; seeing it was no use,
they ungirt their slings and began to salute his ears with stones as
big as one’s fist. Don Quixote gave no heed to the stones, but, letting
drive right and left kept saying:

“Where art thou, proud Alifanfaron? Come before me; I am a single
knight who would fain prove thy prowess hand to hand, and make thee
yield thy life a penalty for the wrong thou dost to the valiant
Pentapolin Garamanta.” Here came a sugar-plum from the brook that
struck him on the side and buried a couple of ribs in his body. Feeling
himself so smitten, he imagined himself slain or badly wounded for
certain, and recollecting his liquor he drew out his flask, and putting
it to his mouth began to pour the contents into his stomach; but ere he
had succeeded in swallowing what seemed to him enough, there came
another almond which struck him on the hand and on the flask so fairly
that it smashed it to pieces, knocking three or four teeth and grinders
out of his mouth in its course, and sorely crushing two fingers of his
hand. Such was the force of the first blow and of the second, that the
poor knight in spite of himself came down backwards off his horse. The
shepherds came up, and felt sure they had killed him; so in all haste
they collected their flock together, took up the dead beasts, of which
there were more than seven, and made off without waiting to ascertain
anything further.

All this time Sancho stood on the hill watching the crazy feats his
master was performing, and tearing his beard and cursing the hour and
the occasion when fortune had made him acquainted with him. Seeing him,
then, brought to the ground, and that the shepherds had taken
themselves off, he ran to him and found him in very bad case, though
not unconscious; and said he:

“Did I not tell you to come back, Señor Don Quixote; and that what you
were going to attack were not armies but droves of sheep?”

“That’s how that thief of a sage, my enemy, can alter and falsify
things,” answered Don Quixote; “thou must know, Sancho, that it is a
very easy matter for those of his sort to make us believe what they
choose; and this malignant being who persecutes me, envious of the
glory he knew I was to win in this battle, has turned the squadrons of
the enemy into droves of sheep. At any rate, do this much, I beg of
thee, Sancho, to undeceive thyself, and see that what I say is true;
mount thy ass and follow them quietly, and thou shalt see that when
they have gone some little distance from this they will return to their
original shape and, ceasing to be sheep, become men in all respects as
I described them to thee at first. But go not just yet, for I want thy
help and assistance; come hither, and see how many of my teeth and
grinders are missing, for I feel as if there was not one left in my
mouth.”

Sancho came so close that he almost put his eyes into his mouth; now
just at that moment the balsam had acted on the stomach of Don Quixote,
so, at the very instant when Sancho came to examine his mouth, he
discharged all its contents with more force than a musket, and full
into the beard of the compassionate squire.

“Holy Mary!” cried Sancho, “what is this that has happened me? Clearly
this sinner is mortally wounded, as he vomits blood from the mouth;”
but considering the matter a little more closely he perceived by the
colour, taste, and smell, that it was not blood but the balsam from the
flask which he had seen him drink; and he was taken with such a
loathing that his stomach turned, and he vomited up his inside over his
very master, and both were left in a precious state. Sancho ran to his
ass to get something wherewith to clean himself, and relieve his
master, out of his alforjas; but not finding them, he well-nigh took
leave of his senses, and cursed himself anew, and in his heart resolved
to quit his master and return home, even though he for