 watching or taking any trouble, with the mere breath of
knight-errantry that has breathed upon thee, seest thyself without more
ado governor of an island, as though it were a mere matter of course.
This I say, Sancho, that thou attribute not the favour thou hast
received to thine own merits, but give thanks to heaven that disposes
matters beneficently, and secondly thanks to the great power the
profession of knight-errantry contains in itself. With a heart, then,
inclined to believe what I have said to thee, attend, my son, to thy
Cato here who would counsel thee and be thy polestar and guide to
direct and pilot thee to a safe haven out of this stormy sea wherein
thou art about to ingulf thyself; for offices and great trusts are
nothing else but a mighty gulf of troubles.

“First of all, my son, thou must fear God, for in the fear of him is
wisdom, and being wise thou canst not err in aught.

“Secondly, thou must keep in view what thou art, striving to know
thyself, the most difficult thing to know that the mind can imagine. If
thou knowest thyself, it will follow thou wilt not puff thyself up like
the frog that strove to make himself as large as the ox; if thou dost,
the recollection of having kept pigs in thine own country will serve as
the ugly feet for the wheel of thy folly.”

“That’s the truth,” said Sancho; “but that was when I was a boy;
afterwards when I was something more of a man it was geese I kept, not
pigs. But to my thinking that has nothing to do with it; for all who
are governors don’t come of a kingly stock.”

“True,” said Don Quixote, “and for that reason those who are not of
noble origin should take care that the dignity of the office they hold
be accompanied by a gentle suavity, which wisely managed will save them
from the sneers of malice that no station escapes.

“Glory in thy humble birth, Sancho, and be not ashamed of saying thou
art peasant-born; for when it is seen thou art not ashamed no one will
set himself to put thee to the blush; and pride thyself rather upon
being one of lowly virtue than a lofty sinner. Countless are they who,
born of mean parentage, have risen to the highest dignities, pontifical
and imperial, and of the truth of this I could give thee instances
enough to weary thee.

“Remember, Sancho, if thou make virtue thy aim, and take a pride in
doing virtuous actions, thou wilt have no cause to envy those who have
princely and lordly ones, for blood is an inheritance, but virtue an
acquisition, and virtue has in itself alone a worth that blood does not
possess.

“This being so, if perchance anyone of thy kinsfolk should come to see
thee when thou art in thine island, thou art not to repel or slight
him, but on the contrary to welcome him, entertain him, and make much
of him; for in so doing thou wilt be approved of heaven (which is not
pleased that any should despise what it hath made), and wilt comply
with the laws of well-ordered nature.

“If thou carriest thy wife with thee (and it is not well for those that
administer governments to be long without their wives), teach and
instruct her, and strive to smooth down her natural roughness; for all
that may be gained by a wise governor may be lost and wasted by a
boorish stupid wife.

“If perchance thou art left a widower—a thing which may happen—and in
virtue of thy office seekest a consort of higher degree, choose not one
to serve thee for a hook, or for a fishing-rod, or for the hood of thy
‘won’t have it;’ for verily, I tell thee, for all the judge’s wife
receives, the husband will be held accountable at the general calling
to account; where he will have repay in death fourfold, items that in
life he regarded as naught.

“Never go by arbitrary law, which is so much favoured by ignorant men
who plume themselves on cleverness.

“Let the tears of the poor man find with thee more compassion, but not
more justice, than the pleadings of the rich.

“Strive to lay bare