ood and superior to
those of Tronchon. The duchess received it with greatest delight, in
which we will leave her, to describe the end of the government of the
great Sancho Panza, flower and mirror of all governors of islands.



p52e.jpg (13K)



CHAPTER LIII.
OF THE TROUBLOUS END AND TERMINATION SANCHO PANZA’S GOVERNMENT CAME TO




p53a.jpg (109K)

Full Size



To fancy that in this life anything belonging to it will remain for
ever in the same state is an idle fancy; on the contrary, in it
everything seems to go in a circle, I mean round and round. The spring
succeeds the summer, the summer the fall, the fall the autumn, the
autumn the winter, and the winter the spring, and so time rolls with
never-ceasing wheel. Man’s life alone, swifter than time, speeds onward
to its end without any hope of renewal, save it be in that other life
which is endless and boundless. Thus saith Cide Hamete the Mahometan
philosopher; for there are many that by the light of nature alone,
without the light of faith, have a comprehension of the fleeting nature
and instability of this present life and the endless duration of that
eternal life we hope for; but our author is here speaking of the
rapidity with which Sancho’s government came to an end, melted away,
disappeared, vanished as it were in smoke and shadow. For as he lay in
bed on the night of the seventh day of his government, sated, not with
bread and wine, but with delivering judgments and giving opinions and
making laws and proclamations, just as sleep, in spite of hunger, was
beginning to close his eyelids, he heard such a noise of bell-ringing
and shouting that one would have fancied the whole island was going to
the bottom. He sat up in bed and remained listening intently to try if
he could make out what could be the cause of so great an uproar; not
only, however, was he unable to discover what it was, but as countless
drums and trumpets now helped to swell the din of the bells and shouts,
he was more puzzled than ever, and filled with fear and terror; and
getting up he put on a pair of slippers because of the dampness of the
floor, and without throwing a dressing gown or anything of the kind
over him he rushed out of the door of his room, just in time to see
approaching along a corridor a band of more than twenty persons with
lighted torches and naked swords in their hands, all shouting out, “To
arms, to arms, señor governor, to arms! The enemy is in the island in
countless numbers, and we are lost unless your skill and valour come to
our support.”

Keeping up this noise, tumult, and uproar, they came to where Sancho
stood dazed and bewildered by what he saw and heard, and as they
approached one of them called out to him, “Arm at once, your lordship,
if you would not have yourself destroyed and the whole island lost.”

“What have I to do with arming?” said Sancho. “What do I know about
arms or supports? Better leave all that to my master Don Quixote, who
will settle it and make all safe in a trice; for I, sinner that I am,
God help me, don’t understand these scuffles.”

“Ah, señor governor,” said another, “what slackness of mettle this is!
Arm yourself; here are arms for you, offensive and defensive; come out
to the plaza and be our leader and captain; it falls upon you by right,
for you are our governor.”

“Arm me then, in God’s name,” said Sancho, and they at once produced
two large shields they had come provided with, and placed them upon him
over his shirt, without letting him put on anything else, one shield in
front and the other behind, and passing his arms through openings they
had made, they bound him tight with ropes, so that there he was walled
and boarded up as straight as a spindle and unable to bend his knees or
stir a single step. In his hand they placed a lance, on which he leant
to keep himself from falling, and as soon as they had him thus fixed
they bade him march forward and lead them on