r knees;’ at any rate I’ll make bold to swear that
in all the histories dealing with knight-errantry that your worship has
read you have never come across anybody disenchanted by whipping; but
whether or no I’ll whip myself when I have a fancy for it, and the
opportunity serves for scourging myself comfortably.”

“God grant it,” said Don Quixote; “and heaven give thee grace to take
it to heart and own the obligation thou art under to help my lady, who
is thine also, inasmuch as thou art mine.”

As they pursued their journey talking in this way they came to the very
same spot where they had been trampled on by the bulls. Don Quixote
recognised it, and said he to Sancho, “This is the meadow where we came
upon those gay shepherdesses and gallant shepherds who were trying to
revive and imitate the pastoral Arcadia there, an idea as novel as it
was happy, in emulation whereof, if so be thou dost approve of it,
Sancho, I would have ourselves turn shepherds, at any rate for the time
I have to live in retirement. I will buy some ewes and everything else
requisite for the pastoral calling; and, I under the name of the
shepherd Quixotize and thou as the shepherd Panzino, we will roam the
woods and groves and meadows singing songs here, lamenting in elegies
there, drinking of the crystal waters of the springs or limpid brooks
or flowing rivers. The oaks will yield us their sweet fruit with
bountiful hand, the trunks of the hard cork trees a seat, the willows
shade, the roses perfume, the widespread meadows carpets tinted with a
thousand dyes; the clear pure air will give us breath, the moon and
stars lighten the darkness of the night for us, song shall be our
delight, lamenting our joy, Apollo will supply us with verses, and love
with conceits whereby we shall make ourselves famed for ever, not only
in this but in ages to come.”

“Egad,” said Sancho, “but that sort of life squares, nay corners, with
my notions; and what is more the bachelor Samson Carrasco and Master
Nicholas the barber won’t have well seen it before they’ll want to
follow it and turn shepherds along with us; and God grant it may not
come into the curate’s head to join the sheepfold too, he’s so jovial
and fond of enjoying himself.”

“Thou art in the right of it, Sancho,” said Don Quixote; “and the
bachelor Samson Carrasco, if he enters the pastoral fraternity, as no
doubt he will, may call himself the shepherd Samsonino, or perhaps the
shepherd Carrascon; Nicholas the barber may call himself Niculoso, as
old Boscan formerly was called Nemoroso; as for the curate I don’t know
what name we can fit to him unless it be something derived from his
title, and we call him the shepherd Curiambro. For the shepherdesses
whose lovers we shall be, we can pick names as we would pears; and as
my lady’s name does just as well for a shepherdess’s as for a
princess’s, I need not trouble myself to look for one that will suit
her better; to thine, Sancho, thou canst give what name thou wilt.”

“I don’t mean to give her any but Teresona,” said Sancho, “which will
go well with her stoutness and with her own right name, as she is
called Teresa; and then when I sing her praises in my verses I’ll show
how chaste my passion is, for I’m not going to look ‘for better bread
than ever came from wheat’ in other men’s houses. It won’t do for the
curate to have a shepherdess, for the sake of good example; and if the
bachelor chooses to have one, that is his look-out.”

“God bless me, Sancho my friend!” said Don Quixote, “what a life we
shall lead! What hautboys and Zamora bagpipes we shall hear, what
tabors, timbrels, and rebecks! And then if among all these different
sorts of music that of the albogues is heard, almost all the pastoral
instruments will be there.”

“What are albogues?” asked Sancho, “for I never in my life heard tell
of them or saw them.”

“Albogues,” said Don Quixote, “are brass plates like candlesticks that
struck ag