 quarter
where he had heard the disturbance. The wench, seeing that her master
was coming and knowing that his temper was terrible, frightened and
panic-stricken made for the bed of Sancho Panza, who still slept, and
crouching upon it made a ball of herself.

The innkeeper came in exclaiming, “Where art thou, strumpet? Of course
this is some of thy work.” At this Sancho awoke, and feeling this mass
almost on top of him fancied he had the nightmare and began to
distribute fisticuffs all round, of which a certain share fell upon
Maritornes, who, irritated by the pain and flinging modesty aside, paid
back so many in return to Sancho that she woke him up in spite of
himself. He then, finding himself so handled, by whom he knew not,
raising himself up as well as he could, grappled with Maritornes, and
he and she between them began the bitterest and drollest scrimmage in
the world. The carrier, however, perceiving by the light of the
innkeeper candle how it fared with his ladylove, quitting Don Quixote,
ran to bring her the help she needed; and the innkeeper did the same
but with a different intention, for his was to chastise the lass, as he
believed that beyond a doubt she alone was the cause of all the
harmony. And so, as the saying is, cat to rat, rat to rope, rope to
stick, the carrier pounded Sancho, Sancho the lass, she him, and the
innkeeper her, and all worked away so briskly that they did not give
themselves a moment’s rest; and the best of it was that the innkeeper’s
lamp went out, and as they were left in the dark they all laid on one
upon the other in a mass so unmercifully that there was not a sound
spot left where a hand could light.

It so happened that there was lodging that night in the inn a
caudrillero of what they call the Old Holy Brotherhood of Toledo, who,
also hearing the extraordinary noise of the conflict, seized his staff
and the tin case with his warrants, and made his way in the dark into
the room crying: “Hold! in the name of the Jurisdiction! Hold! in the
name of the Holy Brotherhood!”

The first that he came upon was the pummelled Don Quixote, who lay
stretched senseless on his back upon his broken-down bed, and, his hand
falling on the beard as he felt about, he continued to cry, “Help for
the Jurisdiction!” but perceiving that he whom he had laid hold of did
not move or stir, he concluded that he was dead and that those in the
room were his murderers, and with this suspicion he raised his voice
still higher, calling out, “Shut the inn gate; see that no one goes
out; they have killed a man here!” This cry startled them all, and each
dropped the contest at the point at which the voice reached him. The
innkeeper retreated to his room, the carrier to his pack-saddles, the
lass to her crib; the unlucky Don Quixote and Sancho alone were unable
to move from where they were. The cuadrillero on this let go Don
Quixote’s beard, and went out to look for a light to search for and
apprehend the culprits; but not finding one, as the innkeeper had
purposely extinguished the lantern on retreating to his room, he was
compelled to have recourse to the hearth, where after much time and
trouble he lit another lamp.



c16e.jpg (32K)



CHAPTER XVII.
IN WHICH ARE CONTAINED THE INNUMERABLE TROUBLES WHICH THE BRAVE DON
QUIXOTE AND HIS GOOD SQUIRE SANCHO PANZA ENDURED IN THE INN, WHICH TO
HIS MISFORTUNE HE TOOK TO BE A CASTLE



c17a.jpg (87K)

Full Size




By this time Don Quixote had recovered from his swoon; and in the same
tone of voice in which he had called to his squire the day before when
he lay stretched “in the vale of the stakes,” he began calling to him
now, “Sancho, my friend, art thou asleep? sleepest thou, friend
Sancho?”

“How can I sleep, curses on it!” returned Sancho discontentedly and
bitterly, “when it is plain that all the devils have been at me this
night?”

“Thou mayest well believe that,” answered Don Quixote, “beca