ain thou art cleaner than a sheet of smooth white
paper.”

Sancho felt, and passing his hand gently and carefully down to the
hollow of his left knee, he looked up at his master and said, “Either
the test is a false one, or we have not come to where your worship
says, nor within many leagues of it.”

“Why, how so?” asked Don Quixote; “hast thou come upon aught?”

“Ay, and aughts,” replied Sancho; and shaking his fingers he washed his
whole hand in the river along which the boat was quietly gliding in
midstream, not moved by any occult intelligence or invisible enchanter,
but simply by the current, just there smooth and gentle.

They now came in sight of some large water mills that stood in the
middle of the river, and the instant Don Quixote saw them he cried out,
“Seest thou there, my friend? there stands the castle or fortress,
where there is, no doubt, some knight in durance, or ill-used queen, or
infanta, or princess, in whose aid I am brought hither.”

“What the devil city, fortress, or castle is your worship talking
about, señor?” said Sancho; “don’t you see that those are mills that
stand in the river to grind corn?”

“Hold thy peace, Sancho,” said Don Quixote; “though they look like
mills they are not so; I have already told thee that enchantments
transform things and change their proper shapes; I do not mean to say
they really change them from one form into another, but that it seems
as though they did, as experience proved in the transformation of
Dulcinea, sole refuge of my hopes.”

By this time, the boat, having reached the middle of the stream, began
to move less slowly than hitherto. The millers belonging to the mills,
when they saw the boat coming down the river, and on the point of being
sucked in by the draught of the wheels, ran out in haste, several of
them, with long poles to stop it, and being all mealy, with faces and
garments covered with flour, they presented a sinister appearance. They
raised loud shouts, crying, “Devils of men, where are you going to? Are
you mad? Do you want to drown yourselves, or dash yourselves to pieces
among these wheels?”

“Did I not tell thee, Sancho,” said Don Quixote at this, “that we had
reached the place where I am to show what the might of my arm can do?
See what ruffians and villains come out against me; see what monsters
oppose me; see what hideous countenances come to frighten us! You shall
soon see, scoundrels!” And then standing up in the boat he began in a
loud voice to hurl threats at the millers, exclaiming, “Ill-conditioned
and worse-counselled rabble, restore to liberty and freedom the person
ye hold in durance in this your fortress or prison, high or low or of
whatever rank or quality he be, for I am Don Quixote of La Mancha,
otherwise called the Knight of the Lions, for whom, by the disposition
of heaven above, it is reserved to give a happy issue to this
adventure;” and so saying he drew his sword and began making passes in
the air at the millers, who, hearing but not understanding all this
nonsense, strove to stop the boat, which was now getting into the
rushing channel of the wheels. Sancho fell upon his knees devoutly
appealing to heaven to deliver him from such imminent peril; which it
did by the activity and quickness of the millers, who, pushing against
the boat with their poles, stopped it, not, however, without upsetting
and throwing Don Quixote and Sancho into the water; and lucky it was
for Don Quixote that he could swim like a goose, though the weight of
his armour carried him twice to the bottom; and had it not been for the
millers, who plunged in and hoisted them both out, it would have been
Troy town with the pair of them. As soon as, more drenched than
thirsty, they were landed, Sancho went down on his knees and with
clasped hands and eyes raised to heaven, prayed a long and fervent
prayer to God to deliver him evermore from the rash projects and
attempts of his master. The fis