tes had no case, or a very bad one, as far as the mere
continuation was concerned. But Avellaneda chose to write a preface to
it, full of such coarse personal abuse as only an ill-conditioned man
could pour out. He taunts Cervantes with being old, with having lost
his hand, with having been in prison, with being poor, with being
friendless, accuses him of envy of Lope’s success, of petulance and
querulousness, and so on; and it was in this that the sting lay.
Avellaneda’s reason for this personal attack is obvious enough. Whoever
he may have been, it is clear that he was one of the dramatists of
Lope’s school, for he has the impudence to charge Cervantes with
attacking him as well as Lope in his criticism on the drama. His
identification has exercised the best critics and baffled all the
ingenuity and research that has been brought to bear on it. Navarrete
and Ticknor both incline to the belief that Cervantes knew who he was;
but I must say I think the anger he shows suggests an invisible
assailant; it is like the irritation of a man stung by a mosquito in
the dark. Cervantes from certain solecisms of language pronounces him
to be an Aragonese, and Pellicer, an Aragonese himself, supports this
view and believes him, moreover, to have been an ecclesiastic, a
Dominican probably.

Any merit Avellaneda has is reflected from Cervantes, and he is too
dull to reflect much. “Dull and dirty” will always be, I imagine, the
verdict of the vast majority of unprejudiced readers. He is, at best, a
poor plagiarist; all he can do is to follow slavishly the lead given
him by Cervantes; his only humour lies in making Don Quixote take inns
for castles and fancy himself some legendary or historical personage,
and Sancho mistake words, invert proverbs, and display his gluttony;
all through he shows a proclivity to coarseness and dirt, and he has
contrived to introduce two tales filthier than anything by the
sixteenth century novellieri and without their sprightliness.

But whatever Avellaneda and his book may be, we must not forget the
debt we owe them. But for them, there can be no doubt, “Don Quixote”
would have come to us a mere torso instead of a complete work. Even if
Cervantes had finished the volume he had in hand, most assuredly he
would have left off with a promise of a Third Part, giving the further
adventures of Don Quixote and humours of Sancho Panza as shepherds. It
is plain that he had at one time an intention of dealing with the
pastoral romances as he had dealt with the books of chivalry, and but
for Avellaneda he would have tried to carry it out. But it is more
likely that, with his plans, and projects, and hopefulness, the volume
would have remained unfinished till his death, and that we should have
never made the acquaintance of the Duke and Duchess, or gone with
Sancho to Barataria.

From the moment the book came into his hands he seems to have been
haunted by the fear that there might be more Avellanedas in the field,
and putting everything else aside, he set himself to finish off his
task and protect Don Quixote in the only way he could, by killing him.
The conclusion is no doubt a hasty and in some places clumsy piece of
work and the frequent repetition of the scolding administered to
Avellaneda becomes in the end rather wearisome; but it is, at any rate,
a conclusion and for that we must thank Avellaneda.

The new volume was ready for the press in February, but was not printed
till the very end of 1615, and during the interval Cervantes put
together the comedies and interludes he had written within the last few
years, and, as he adds plaintively, found no demand for among the
managers, and published them with a preface, worth the book it
introduces tenfold, in which he gives an account of the early Spanish
stage, and of his own attempts as a dramatist. It is needless to say
they were put forward by Cervantes in all good faith and full
confidence in their merits.