uzzle over; the children turn its leaves, the young
people read it, the grown men understand it, the old folk praise it; in
a word, it is so thumbed, and read, and got by heart by people of all
sorts, that the instant they see any lean hack, they say, ‘There goes
Rocinante.’ And those that are most given to reading it are the pages,
for there is not a lord’s ante-chamber where there is not a ‘Don
Quixote’ to be found; one takes it up if another lays it down; this one
pounces upon it, and that begs for it. In short, the said history is
the most delightful and least injurious entertainment that has been
hitherto seen, for there is not to be found in the whole of it even the
semblance of an immodest word, or a thought that is other than
Catholic.”

“To write in any other way,” said Don Quixote, “would not be to write
truth, but falsehood, and historians who have recourse to falsehood
ought to be burned, like those who coin false money; and I know not
what could have led the author to have recourse to novels and
irrelevant stories, when he had so much to write about in mine; no
doubt he must have gone by the proverb ‘with straw or with hay, &c.,’
for by merely setting forth my thoughts, my sighs, my tears, my lofty
purposes, my enterprises, he might have made a volume as large, or
larger than all the works of El Tostado would make up. In fact, the
conclusion I arrive at, señor bachelor, is, that to write histories, or
books of any kind, there is need of great judgment and a ripe
understanding. To give expression to humour, and write in a strain of
graceful pleasantry, is the gift of great geniuses. The cleverest
character in comedy is the clown, for he who would make people take him
for a fool, must not be one. History is in a measure a sacred thing,
for it should be true, and where the truth is, there God is; but
notwithstanding this, there are some who write and fling books
broadcast on the world as if they were fritters.”

“There is no book so bad but it has something good in it,” said the
bachelor.

“No doubt of that,” replied Don Quixote; “but it often happens that
those who have acquired and attained a well-deserved reputation by
their writings, lose it entirely, or damage it in some degree, when
they give them to the press.”

“The reason of that,” said Samson, “is, that as printed works are
examined leisurely, their faults are easily seen; and the greater the
fame of the writer, the more closely are they scrutinised. Men famous
for their genius, great poets, illustrious historians, are always, or
most commonly, envied by those who take a particular delight and
pleasure in criticising the writings of others, without having produced
any of their own.”

“That is no wonder,” said Don Quixote; “for there are many divines who
are no good for the pulpit, but excellent in detecting the defects or
excesses of those who preach.”

“All that is true, Señor Don Quixote,” said Carrasco; “but I wish such
fault-finders were more lenient and less exacting, and did not pay so
much attention to the spots on the bright sun of the work they grumble
at; for if _aliquando bonus dormitat Homerus_, they should remember how
long he remained awake to shed the light of his work with as little
shade as possible; and perhaps it may be that what they find fault with
may be moles, that sometimes heighten the beauty of the face that bears
them; and so I say very great is the risk to which he who prints a book
exposes himself, for of all impossibilities the greatest is to write
one that will satisfy and please all readers.”

“That which treats of me must have pleased few,” said Don Quixote.

“Quite the contrary,” said the bachelor; “for, as _stultorum infinitum
est numerus_, innumerable are those who have relished the said history;
but some have brought a charge against the author’s memory, inasmuch as
he forgot to say who the thief was who stole Sancho’s Dapple; for it is
not stated there