 fancy to go into the
Church, not finding myself fit to hold office in it; for I may tell
you, though I seem a man, I am no better than a beast for the Church.”

“Well, then, you are wrong there,” said he of the Grove; “for those
island governments are not all satisfactory; some are awkward, some are
poor, some are dull, and, in short, the highest and choicest brings
with it a heavy burden of cares and troubles which the unhappy wight to
whose lot it has fallen bears upon his shoulders. Far better would it
be for us who have adopted this accursed service to go back to our own
houses, and there employ ourselves in pleasanter occupations—in hunting
or fishing, for instance; for what squire in the world is there so poor
as not to have a hack and a couple of greyhounds and a fishingrod to
amuse himself with in his own village?”

“I am not in want of any of those things,” said Sancho; “to be sure I
have no hack, but I have an ass that is worth my master’s horse twice
over; God send me a bad Easter, and that the next one I am to see, if I
would swap, even if I got four bushels of barley to boot. You will
laugh at the value I put on my Dapple—for dapple is the colour of my
beast. As to greyhounds, I can’t want for them, for there are enough
and to spare in my town; and, moreover, there is more pleasure in sport
when it is at other people’s expense.”

“In truth and earnest, sir squire,” said he of the Grove, “I have made
up my mind and determined to have done with these drunken vagaries of
these knights, and go back to my village, and bring up my children; for
I have three, like three Oriental pearls.”

“I have two,” said Sancho, “that might be presented before the Pope
himself, especially a girl whom I am breeding up for a countess, please
God, though in spite of her mother.”

“And how old is this lady that is being bred up for a countess?” asked
he of the Grove.

“Fifteen, a couple of years more or less,” answered Sancho; “but she is
as tall as a lance, and as fresh as an April morning, and as strong as
a porter.”

“Those are gifts to fit her to be not only a countess but a nymph of
the greenwood,” said he of the Grove; “whoreson strumpet! what pith the
rogue must have!”

To which Sancho made answer, somewhat sulkily, “She’s no strumpet, nor
was her mother, nor will either of them be, please God, while I live;
speak more civilly; for one bred up among knights-errant, who are
courtesy itself, your words don’t seem to me to be very becoming.”

“O how little you know about compliments, sir squire,” returned he of
the Grove. “What! don’t you know that when a horseman delivers a good
lance thrust at the bull in the plaza, or when anyone does anything
very well, the people are wont to say, ‘Ha, whoreson rip! how well he
has done it!’ and that what seems to be abuse in the expression is high
praise? Disown sons and daughters, señor, who don’t do what deserves
that compliments of this sort should be paid to their parents.”

“I do disown them,” replied Sancho, “and in this way, and by the same
reasoning, you might call me and my children and my wife all the
strumpets in the world, for all they do and say is of a kind that in
the highest degree deserves the same praise; and to see them again I
pray God to deliver me from mortal sin, or, what comes to the same
thing, to deliver me from this perilous calling of squire into which I
have fallen a second time, decayed and beguiled by a purse with a
hundred ducats that I found one day in the heart of the Sierra Morena;
and the devil is always putting a bag full of doubloons before my eyes,
here, there, everywhere, until I fancy at every stop I am putting my
hand on it, and hugging it, and carrying it home with me, and making
investments, and getting interest, and living like a prince; and so
long as I think of this I make light of all the hardships I endure with
this simpleton of a master of mine, who, I well know, is more of a
