ivalry
and the infatuation of their readers. Ridicule was the only besom to
sweep away that dust.

That this was the task Cervantes set himself, and that he had ample
provocation to urge him to it, will be sufficiently clear to those who
look into the evidence; as it will be also that it was not chivalry
itself that he attacked and swept away. Of all the absurdities that,
thanks to poetry, will be repeated to the end of time, there is no
greater one than saying that “Cervantes smiled Spain’s chivalry away.”
In the first place there was no chivalry for him to smile away. Spain’s
chivalry had been dead for more than a century. Its work was done when
Granada fell, and as chivalry was essentially republican in its nature,
it could not live under the rule that Ferdinand substituted for the
free institutions of mediaeval Spain. What he did smile away was not
chivalry but a degrading mockery of it.

The true nature of the “right arm” and the “bright array,” before
which, according to the poet, “the world gave ground,” and which
Cervantes’ single laugh demolished, may be gathered from the words of
one of his own countrymen, Don Felix Pacheco, as reported by Captain
George Carleton, in his “Military Memoirs from 1672 to 1713.” “Before
the appearance in the world of that labour of Cervantes,” he said, “it
was next to an impossibility for a man to walk the streets with any
delight or without danger. There were seen so many cavaliers prancing
and curvetting before the windows of their mistresses, that a stranger
would have imagined the whole nation to have been nothing less than a
race of knight-errants. But after the world became a little acquainted
with that notable history, the man that was seen in that once
celebrated drapery was pointed at as a Don Quixote, and found himself
the jest of high and low. And I verily believe that to this, and this
only, we owe that dampness and poverty of spirit which has run through
all our councils for a century past, so little agreeable to those
nobler actions of our famous ancestors.”

To call “Don Quixote” a sad book, preaching a pessimist view of life,
argues a total misconception of its drift. It would be so if its moral
were that, in this world, true enthusiasm naturally leads to ridicule
and discomfiture. But it preaches nothing of the sort; its moral, so
far as it can be said to have one, is that the spurious enthusiasm that
is born of vanity and self-conceit, that is made an end in itself, not
a means to an end, that acts on mere impulse, regardless of
circumstances and consequences, is mischievous to its owner, and a very
considerable nuisance to the community at large. To those who cannot
distinguish between the one kind and the other, no doubt “Don Quixote”
is a sad book; no doubt to some minds it is very sad that a man who had
just uttered so beautiful a sentiment as that “it is a hard case to
make slaves of those whom God and Nature made free,” should be
ungratefully pelted by the scoundrels his crazy philanthropy had let
loose on society; but to others of a more judicial cast it will be a
matter of regret that reckless self-sufficient enthusiasm is not
oftener requited in some such way for all the mischief it does in the
world.

A very slight examination of the structure of “Don Quixote” will
suffice to show that Cervantes had no deep design or elaborate plan in
his mind when he began the book. When he wrote those lines in which
“with a few strokes of a great master he sets before us the pauper
gentleman,” he had no idea of the goal to which his imagination was
leading him. There can be little doubt that all he contemplated was a
short tale to range with those he had already written, a tale setting
forth the ludicrous results that might be expected to follow the
attempt of a crazy gentleman to act the part of a knight-errant in
modern life.

It is plain, for one thing, that Sancho Panza did not enter into the
original sche