
late, and we have a great deal to do and to say and show.”

Don Quixote and Sancho obeyed him and went to where the show was
already put up and uncovered, set all around with lighted wax tapers
which made it look splendid and bright. When they came to it Master
Pedro ensconced himself inside it, for it was he who had to work the
puppets, and a boy, a servant of his, posted himself outside to act as
showman and explain the mysteries of the exhibition, having a wand in
his hand to point to the figures as they came out. And so, all who were
in the inn being arranged in front of the show, some of them standing,
and Don Quixote, Sancho, the page, and cousin, accommodated with the
best places, the interpreter began to say what he will hear or see who
reads or hears the next chapter.



p25e.jpg (28K)



CHAPTER XXVI.
WHEREIN IS CONTINUED THE DROLL ADVENTURE OF THE PUPPET-SHOWMAN,
TOGETHER WITH OTHER THINGS IN TRUTH RIGHT GOOD




p26a.jpg (157K)

Full Size



All were silent, Tyrians and Trojans; I mean all who were watching the
show were hanging on the lips of the interpreter of its wonders, when
drums and trumpets were heard to sound inside it and cannon to go off.
The noise was soon over, and then the boy lifted up his voice and said,
“This true story which is here represented to your worships is taken
word for word from the French chronicles and from the Spanish ballads
that are in everybody’s mouth, and in the mouth of the boys about the
streets. Its subject is the release by Señor Don Gaiferos of his wife
Melisendra, when a captive in Spain at the hands of the Moors in the
city of Sansueña, for so they called then what is now called Saragossa;
and there you may see how Don Gaiferos is playing at the tables, just
as they sing it—

At tables playing Don Gaiferos sits,
For Melisendra is forgotten now.


And that personage who appears there with a crown on his head and a
sceptre in his hand is the Emperor Charlemagne, the supposed father of
Melisendra, who, angered to see his son-in-law’s inaction and
unconcern, comes in to chide him; and observe with what vehemence and
energy he chides him, so that you would fancy he was going to give him
half a dozen raps with his sceptre; and indeed there are authors who
say he did give them, and sound ones too; and after having said a great
deal to him about imperilling his honour by not effecting the release
of his wife, he said, so the tale runs,

Enough I’ve said, see to it now.


Observe, too, how the emperor turns away, and leaves Don Gaiferos
fuming; and you see now how in a burst of anger, he flings the table
and the board far from him and calls in haste for his armour, and asks
his cousin Don Roland for the loan of his sword, Durindana, and how Don
Roland refuses to lend it, offering him his company in the difficult
enterprise he is undertaking; but he, in his valour and anger, will not
accept it, and says that he alone will suffice to rescue his wife, even
though she were imprisoned deep in the centre of the earth, and with
this he retires to arm himself and set out on his journey at once. Now
let your worships turn your eyes to that tower that appears there,
which is supposed to be one of the towers of the alcazar of Saragossa,
now called the Aljaferia; that lady who appears on that balcony dressed
in Moorish fashion is the peerless Melisendra, for many a time she used
to gaze from thence upon the road to France, and seek consolation in
her captivity by thinking of Paris and her husband. Observe, too, a new
incident which now occurs, such as, perhaps, never was seen. Do you not
see that Moor, who silently and stealthily, with his finger on his lip,
approaches Melisendra from behind? Observe now how he prints a kiss
upon her lips, and what a hurry she is in to spit, and wipe them with
the white sleeve of her smock, and how she bewails herself, and tears
her fair hair as though it were to blame for the 