houghts, far more than hunger,
kept awake, could not close an eye, and roamed in fancy to and fro
through all sorts of places. At one moment it seemed to him that he was
in the cave of Montesinos and saw Dulcinea, transformed into a country
wench, skipping and mounting upon her she-ass; again that the words of
the sage Merlin were sounding in his ears, setting forth the conditions
to be observed and the exertions to be made for the disenchantment of
Dulcinea. He lost all patience when he considered the laziness and want
of charity of his squire Sancho; for to the best of his belief he had
only given himself five lashes, a number paltry and disproportioned to
the vast number required. At this thought he felt such vexation and
anger that he reasoned the matter thus: “If Alexander the Great cut the
Gordian knot, saying, ‘To cut comes to the same thing as to untie,’ and
yet did not fail to become lord paramount of all Asia, neither more nor
less could happen now in Dulcinea’s disenchantment if I scourge Sancho
against his will; for, if it is the condition of the remedy that Sancho
shall receive three thousand and odd lashes, what does it matter to me
whether he inflicts them himself, or someone else inflicts them, when
the essential point is that he receives them, let them come from
whatever quarter they may?”

With this idea he went over to Sancho, having first taken Rocinante’s
reins and arranged them so as to be able to flog him with them, and
began to untie the points (the common belief is he had but one in
front) by which his breeches were held up; but the instant he
approached him Sancho woke up in his full senses and cried out, “What
is this? Who is touching me and untrussing me?”

“It is I,” said Don Quixote, “and I come to make good thy shortcomings
and relieve my own distresses; I come to whip thee, Sancho, and wipe
off some portion of the debt thou hast undertaken. Dulcinea is
perishing, thou art living on regardless, I am dying of hope deferred;
therefore untruss thyself with a good will, for mine it is, here, in
this retired spot, to give thee at least two thousand lashes.”

“Not a bit of it,” said Sancho; “let your worship keep quiet, or else
by the living God the deaf shall hear us; the lashes I pledged myself
to must be voluntary and not forced upon me, and just now I have no
fancy to whip myself; it is enough if I give you my word to flog and
flap myself when I have a mind.”

“It will not do to leave it to thy courtesy, Sancho,” said Don Quixote,
“for thou art hard of heart and, though a clown, tender of flesh;” and
at the same time he strove and struggled to untie him.

Seeing this Sancho got up, and grappling with his master he gripped him
with all his might in his arms, giving him a trip with the heel
stretched him on the ground on his back, and pressing his right knee on
his chest held his hands in his own so that he could neither move nor
breathe.

“How now, traitor!” exclaimed Don Quixote. “Dost thou revolt against
thy master and natural lord? Dost thou rise against him who gives thee
his bread?”

“I neither put down king, nor set up king,” said Sancho; “I only stand
up for myself who am my own lord; if your worship promises me to be
quiet, and not to offer to whip me now, I’ll let you go free and
unhindered; if not—

Traitor and Doña Sancha’s foe,
Thou diest on the spot.”


Don Quixote gave his promise, and swore by the life of his thoughts not
to touch so much as a hair of his garments, and to leave him entirely
free and to his own discretion to whip himself whenever he pleased.



p60c.jpg (250K)

Full Size



Sancho rose and removed some distance from the spot, but as he was
about to place himself leaning against another tree he felt something
touch his head, and putting up his hands encountered somebody’s two
feet with shoes and stockings on them. He trembled with fear and made
for another tree, where the very same thing hap