licy and carried it into effect, all our schemes and
plots, importunities and wiles, being ineffectual to blind his Argus
eyes, ever on the watch lest one of us should remain behind in
concealment, and like a hidden root come in course of time to sprout
and bear poisonous fruit in Spain, now cleansed, and relieved of the
fear in which our vast numbers kept it. Heroic resolve of the great
Philip the Third, and unparalleled wisdom to have entrusted it to the
said Don Bernardino de Velasco!”

“At any rate,” said Don Antonio, “when I am there I will make all
possible efforts, and let heaven do as pleases it best; Don Gregorio
will come with me to relieve the anxiety which his parents must be
suffering on account of his absence; Ana Felix will remain in my house
with my wife, or in a monastery; and I know the viceroy will be glad
that the worthy Ricote should stay with him until we see what terms I
can make.”

The viceroy agreed to all that was proposed; but Don Gregorio on
learning what had passed declared he could not and would not on any
account leave Ana Felix; however, as it was his purpose to go and see
his parents and devise some way of returning for her, he fell in with
the proposed arrangement. Ana Felix remained with Don Antonio’s wife,
and Ricote in the viceroy’s house.

The day for Don Antonio’s departure came; and two days later that for
Don Quixote’s and Sancho’s, for Don Quixote’s fall did not suffer him
to take the road sooner. There were tears and sighs, swoonings and
sobs, at the parting between Don Gregorio and Ana Felix. Ricote offered
Don Gregorio a thousand crowns if he would have them, but he would not
take any save five which Don Antonio lent him and he promised to repay
at the capital. So the two of them took their departure, and Don
Quixote and Sancho afterwards, as has been already said, Don Quixote
without his armour and in travelling gear, and Sancho on foot, Dapple
being loaded with the armour.



p65e.jpg (43K)



CHAPTER LXVI.
WHICH TREATS OF WHAT HE WHO READS WILL SEE, OR WHAT HE WHO HAS IT READ
TO HIM WILL HEAR




p66a.jpg (125K)

Full Size



As he left Barcelona, Don Quixote turned gaze upon the spot where he
had fallen. “Here Troy was,” said he; “here my ill-luck, not my
cowardice, robbed me of all the glory I had won; here Fortune made me
the victim of her caprices; here the lustre of my achievements was
dimmed; here, in a word, fell my happiness never to rise again.”



p66b.jpg (251K)

Full Size



“Señor,” said Sancho on hearing this, “it is the part of brave hearts
to be patient in adversity just as much as to be glad in prosperity; I
judge by myself, for, if when I was a governor I was glad, now that I
am a squire and on foot I am not sad; and I have heard say that she
whom commonly they call Fortune is a drunken whimsical jade, and, what
is more, blind, and therefore neither sees what she does, nor knows
whom she casts down or whom she sets up.”

“Thou art a great philosopher, Sancho,” said Don Quixote; “thou
speakest very sensibly; I know not who taught thee. But I can tell thee
there is no such thing as Fortune in the world, nor does anything which
takes place there, be it good or bad, come about by chance, but by the
special preordination of heaven; and hence the common saying that ‘each
of us is the maker of his own Fortune.’ I have been that of mine; but
not with the proper amount of prudence, and my self-confidence has
therefore made me pay dearly; for I ought to have reflected that
Rocinante’s feeble strength could not resist the mighty bulk of the
Knight of the White Moon’s horse. In a word, I ventured it, I did my
best, I was overthrown, but though I lost my honour I did not lose nor
can I lose the virtue of keeping my word. When I was a knight-errant,
daring and valiant, I supported my achievements by hand and deed, and
now that I am a humble squire I will support my words by keeping the
p