d.”

“As to whether I ought to be vexed or not,” returned Don Quixote, “I
myself am the best judge.”

Hereupon the curate observed, “I have hardly said a word as yet; and I
would gladly be relieved of a doubt, arising from what Don Quixote has
said, that worries and works my conscience.”

“The señor curate has leave for more than that,” returned Don Quixote,
“so he may declare his doubt, for it is not pleasant to have a doubt on
one’s conscience.”

“Well then, with that permission,” said the curate, “I say my doubt is
that, all I can do, I cannot persuade myself that the whole pack of
knights-errant you, Señor Don Quixote, have mentioned, were really and
truly persons of flesh and blood, that ever lived in the world; on the
contrary, I suspect it to be all fiction, fable, and falsehood, and
dreams told by men awakened from sleep, or rather still half asleep.”

“That is another mistake,” replied Don Quixote, “into which many have
fallen who do not believe that there ever were such knights in the
world, and I have often, with divers people and on divers occasions,
tried to expose this almost universal error to the light of truth.
Sometimes I have not been successful in my purpose, sometimes I have,
supporting it upon the shoulders of the truth; which truth is so clear
that I can almost say I have with my own eyes seen Amadis of Gaul, who
was a man of lofty stature, fair complexion, with a handsome though
black beard, of a countenance between gentle and stern in expression,
sparing of words, slow to anger, and quick to put it away from him; and
as I have depicted Amadis, so I could, I think, portray and describe
all the knights-errant that are in all the histories in the world; for
by the perception I have that they were what their histories describe,
and by the deeds they did and the dispositions they displayed, it is
possible, with the aid of sound philosophy, to deduce their features,
complexion, and stature.”

“How big, in your worship’s opinion, may the giant Morgante have been,
Señor Don Quixote?” asked the barber.

“With regard to giants,” replied Don Quixote, “opinions differ as to
whether there ever were any or not in the world; but the Holy
Scripture, which cannot err by a jot from the truth, shows us that
there were, when it gives us the history of that big Philistine,
Goliath, who was seven cubits and a half in height, which is a huge
size. Likewise, in the island of Sicily, there have been found
leg-bones and arm-bones so large that their size makes it plain that
their owners were giants, and as tall as great towers; geometry puts
this fact beyond a doubt. But, for all that, I cannot speak with
certainty as to the size of Morgante, though I suspect he cannot have
been very tall; and I am inclined to be of this opinion because I find
in the history in which his deeds are particularly mentioned, that he
frequently slept under a roof and as he found houses to contain him, it
is clear that his bulk could not have been anything excessive.”

“That is true,” said the curate, and yielding to the enjoyment of
hearing such nonsense, he asked him what was his notion of the features
of Reinaldos of Montalban, and Don Roland and the rest of the Twelve
Peers of France, for they were all knights-errant.

“As for Reinaldos,” replied Don Quixote, “I venture to say that he was
broad-faced, of ruddy complexion, with roguish and somewhat prominent
eyes, excessively punctilious and touchy, and given to the society of
thieves and scapegraces. With regard to Roland, or Rotolando, or
Orlando (for the histories call him by all these names), I am of
opinion, and hold, that he was of middle height, broad-shouldered,
rather bow-legged, swarthy-complexioned, red-bearded, with a hairy body
and a severe expression of countenance, a man of few words, but very
polite and well-bred.”

“If Roland was not a more graceful person than your worship has
described,” said the curate, “it 