 which had befallen Anselmo; and then he read the
paper, the handwriting of which he recognised as his, and which
contained these words:

“A foolish and ill-advised desire has robbed me of life. If the news of
my death should reach the ears of Camilla, let her know that I forgive
her, for she was not bound to perform miracles, nor ought I to have
required her to perform them; and since I have been the author of my
own dishonour, there is no reason why—”

So far Anselmo had written, and thus it was plain that at this point,
before he could finish what he had to say, his life came to an end. The
next day his friend sent intelligence of his death to his relatives,
who had already ascertained his misfortune, as well as the convent
where Camilla lay almost on the point of accompanying her husband on
that inevitable journey, not on account of the tidings of his death,
but because of those she received of her lover’s departure. Although
she saw herself a widow, it is said she refused either to quit the
convent or take the veil, until, not long afterwards, intelligence
reached her that Lothario had been killed in a battle in which M. de
Lautrec had been recently engaged with the Great Captain Gonzalo
Fernandez de Cordova in the kingdom of Naples, whither her too late
repentant lover had repaired. On learning this Camilla took the veil,
and shortly afterwards died, worn out by grief and melancholy. This was
the end of all three, an end that came of a thoughtless beginning.

“I like this novel,” said the curate; “but I cannot persuade myself of
its truth; and if it has been invented, the author’s invention is
faulty, for it is impossible to imagine any husband so foolish as to
try such a costly experiment as Anselmo’s. If it had been represented
as occurring between a gallant and his mistress it might pass; but
between husband and wife there is something of an impossibility about
it. As to the way in which the story is told, however, I have no fault
to find.”



CHAPTER XXXVI.
WHICH TREATS OF MORE CURIOUS INCIDENTS THAT OCCURRED AT THE INN




c36a.jpg (124K)

Full Size




Just at that instant the landlord, who was standing at the gate of the
inn, exclaimed, “Here comes a fine troop of guests; if they stop here
we may say _gaudeamus_.”

“What are they?” said Cardenio.

“Four men,” said the landlord, “riding _à la jineta_, with lances and
bucklers, and all with black veils, and with them there is a woman in
white on a side-saddle, whose face is also veiled, and two attendants
on foot.”

“Are they very near?” said the curate.

“So near,” answered the landlord, “that here they come.”

Hearing this Dorothea covered her face, and Cardenio retreated into Don
Quixote’s room, and they hardly had time to do so before the whole
party the host had described entered the inn, and the four that were on
horseback, who were of highbred appearance and bearing, dismounted, and
came forward to take down the woman who rode on the side-saddle, and
one of them taking her in his arms placed her in a chair that stood at
the entrance of the room where Cardenio had hidden himself. All this
time neither she nor they had removed their veils or spoken a word,
only on sitting down on the chair the woman gave a deep sigh and let
her arms fall like one that was ill and weak. The attendants on foot
then led the horses away to the stable. Observing this the curate,
curious to know who these people in such a dress and preserving such
silence were, went to where the servants were standing and put the
question to one of them, who answered him.

“Faith, sir, I cannot tell you who they are, I only know they seem to
be people of distinction, particularly he who advanced to take the lady
you saw in his arms; and I say so because all the rest show him
respect, and nothing is done except what he directs and orders.”

“And the lady, who is she?” asked the curate.

“That I cannot tell you eithe