tween those whom I know to
be at variance; I am the devoted servant of Our Lady, and my trust is
ever in the infinite mercy of God our Lord.”

Sancho listened with the greatest attention to the account of the
gentleman’s life and occupation; and thinking it a good and a holy
life, and that he who led it ought to work miracles, he threw himself
off Dapple, and running in haste seized his right stirrup and kissed
his foot again and again with a devout heart and almost with tears.

Seeing this the gentleman asked him, “What are you about, brother? What
are these kisses for?”

“Let me kiss,” said Sancho, “for I think your worship is the first
saint in the saddle I ever saw all the days of my life.”

“I am no saint,” replied the gentleman, “but a great sinner; but you
are, brother, for you must be a good fellow, as your simplicity shows.”

Sancho went back and regained his pack-saddle, having extracted a laugh
from his master’s profound melancholy, and excited fresh amazement in
Don Diego. Don Quixote then asked him how many children he had, and
observed that one of the things wherein the ancient philosophers, who
were without the true knowledge of God, placed the _summum bonum_ was
in the gifts of nature, in those of fortune, in having many friends,
and many and good children.

“I, Señor Don Quixote,” answered the gentleman, “have one son, without
whom, perhaps, I should count myself happier than I am, not because he
is a bad son, but because he is not so good as I could wish. He is
eighteen years of age; he has been for six at Salamanca studying Latin
and Greek, and when I wished him to turn to the study of other sciences
I found him so wrapped up in that of poetry (if that can be called a
science) that there is no getting him to take kindly to the law, which
I wished him to study, or to theology, the queen of them all. I would
like him to be an honour to his family, as we live in days when our
kings liberally reward learning that is virtuous and worthy; for
learning without virtue is a pearl on a dunghill. He spends the whole
day in settling whether Homer expressed himself correctly or not in
such and such a line of the Iliad, whether Martial was indecent or not
in such and such an epigram, whether such and such lines of Virgil are
to be understood in this way or in that; in short, all his talk is of
the works of these poets, and those of Horace, Perseus, Juvenal, and
Tibullus; for of the moderns in our own language he makes no great
account; but with all his seeming indifference to Spanish poetry, just
now his thoughts are absorbed in making a gloss on four lines that have
been sent him from Salamanca, which I suspect are for some poetical
tournament.”

To all this Don Quixote said in reply, “Children, señor, are portions
of their parents’ bowels, and therefore, be they good or bad, are to be
loved as we love the souls that give us life; it is for the parents to
guide them from infancy in the ways of virtue, propriety, and worthy
Christian conduct, so that when grown up they may be the staff of their
parents’ old age, and the glory of their posterity; and to force them
to study this or that science I do not think wise, though it may be no
harm to persuade them; and when there is no need to study for the sake
of _pane lucrando_, and it is the student’s good fortune that heaven
has given him parents who provide him with it, it would be my advice to
them to let him pursue whatever science they may see him most inclined
to; and though that of poetry is less useful than pleasurable, it is
not one of those that bring discredit upon the possessor. Poetry,
gentle sir, is, as I take it, like a tender young maiden of supreme
beauty, to array, bedeck, and adorn whom is the task of several other
maidens, who are all the rest of the sciences; and she must avail
herself of the help of all, and all derive their lustre from her. But
this maiden will not bear to be handled, nor d