d what he did on account of
him on whose behalf it seems he spoke, he is entirely mistaken; for I
worship the genius of that person, and admire his works and his
unceasing and strenuous industry. After all, I am grateful to this
gentleman, the author, for saying that my novels are more satirical
than exemplary, but that they are good; for they could not be that
unless there was a little of everything in them.

I suspect thou wilt say that I am taking a very humble line, and
keeping myself too much within the bounds of my moderation, from a
feeling that additional suffering should not be inflicted upon a
sufferer, and that what this gentleman has to endure must doubtless be
very great, as he does not dare to come out into the open field and
broad daylight, but hides his name and disguises his country as if he
had been guilty of some lese majesty. If perchance thou shouldst come
to know him, tell him from me that I do not hold myself aggrieved; for
I know well what the temptations of the devil are, and that one of the
greatest is putting it into a man’s head that he can write and print a
book by which he will get as much fame as money, and as much money as
fame; and to prove it I will beg of you, in your own sprightly,
pleasant way, to tell him this story.

There was a madman in Seville who took to one of the drollest
absurdities and vagaries that ever madman in the world gave way to. It
was this: he made a tube of reed sharp at one end, and catching a dog
in the street, or wherever it might be, he with his foot held one of
its legs fast, and with his hand lifted up the other, and as best he
could fixed the tube where, by blowing, he made the dog as round as a
ball; then holding it in this position, he gave it a couple of slaps on
the belly, and let it go, saying to the bystanders (and there were
always plenty of them): “Do your worships think, now, that it is an
easy thing to blow up a dog?”—Does your worship think now, that it is
an easy thing to write a book?

And if this story does not suit him, you may, dear reader, tell him
this one, which is likewise of a madman and a dog.

In Cordova there was another madman, whose way it was to carry a piece
of marble slab or a stone, not of the lightest, on his head, and when
he came upon any unwary dog he used to draw close to him and let the
weight fall right on top of him; on which the dog in a rage, barking
and howling, would run three streets without stopping. It so happened,
however, that one of the dogs he discharged his load upon was a
cap-maker’s dog, of which his master was very fond. The stone came down
hitting it on the head, the dog raised a yell at the blow, the master
saw the affair and was wroth, and snatching up a measuring-yard rushed
out at the madman and did not leave a sound bone in his body, and at
every stroke he gave him he said, “You dog, you thief! my lurcher!
Don’t you see, you brute, that my dog is a lurcher?” and so, repeating
the word “lurcher” again and again, he sent the madman away beaten to a
jelly. The madman took the lesson to heart, and vanished, and for more
than a month never once showed himself in public; but after that he
came out again with his old trick and a heavier load than ever. He came
up to where there was a dog, and examining it very carefully without
venturing to let the stone fall, he said: “This is a lurcher; ware!” In
short, all the dogs he came across, be they mastiffs or terriers, he
said were lurchers; and he discharged no more stones. Maybe it will be
the same with this historian; that he will not venture another time to
discharge the weight of his wit in books, which, being bad, are harder
than stones. Tell him, too, that I do not care a farthing for the
threat he holds out to me of depriving me of my profit by means of his
book; for, to borrow from the famous interlude of “The Perendenga,” I
say in answer to him, “Long life to my lord the Veintiquatro, and
Christ b