his friend Lothario to make known his sorrow to
him; but when he failed to find him and the servants reported that he
had been absent from his house all night and had taken with him all the
money he had, he felt as though he were losing his senses; and to make
all complete on returning to his own house he found it deserted and
empty, not one of all his servants, male or female, remaining in it. He
knew not what to think, or say, or do, and his reason seemed to be
deserting him little by little. He reviewed his position, and saw
himself in a moment left without wife, friend, or servants, abandoned,
he felt, by the heaven above him, and more than all robbed of his
honour, for in Camilla’s disappearance he saw his own ruin. After long
reflection he resolved at last to go to his friend’s village, where he
had been staying when he afforded opportunities for the contrivance of
this complication of misfortune. He locked the doors of his house,
mounted his horse, and with a broken spirit set out on his journey; but
he had hardly gone half-way when, harassed by his reflections, he had
to dismount and tie his horse to a tree, at the foot of which he threw
himself, giving vent to piteous heartrending sighs; and there he
remained till nearly nightfall, when he observed a man approaching on
horseback from the city, of whom, after saluting him, he asked what was
the news in Florence.

The citizen replied, “The strangest that have been heard for many a
day; for it is reported abroad that Lothario, the great friend of the
wealthy Anselmo, who lived at San Giovanni, carried off last night
Camilla, the wife of Anselmo, who also has disappeared. All this has
been told by a maid-servant of Camilla’s, whom the governor found last
night lowering herself by a sheet from the windows of Anselmo’s house.
I know not indeed, precisely, how the affair came to pass; all I know
is that the whole city is wondering at the occurrence, for no one could
have expected a thing of the kind, seeing the great and intimate
friendship that existed between them, so great, they say, that they
were called ‘The Two Friends.’”

“Is it known at all,” said Anselmo, “what road Lothario and Camilla
took?”

“Not in the least,” said the citizen, “though the governor has been
very active in searching for them.”

“God speed you, señor,” said Anselmo.

“God be with you,” said the citizen and went his way.

This disastrous intelligence almost robbed Anselmo not only of his
senses but of his life. He got up as well as he was able and reached
the house of his friend, who as yet knew nothing of his misfortune, but
seeing him come pale, worn, and haggard, perceived that he was
suffering some heavy affliction. Anselmo at once begged to be allowed
to retire to rest, and to be given writing materials. His wish was
complied with and he was left lying down and alone, for he desired
this, and even that the door should be locked. Finding himself alone he
so took to heart the thought of his misfortune that by the signs of
death he felt within him he knew well his life was drawing to a close,
and therefore he resolved to leave behind him a declaration of the
cause of his strange end. He began to write, but before he had put down
all he meant to say, his breath failed him and he yielded up his life,
a victim to the suffering which his ill-advised curiosity had entailed
upon him. The master of the house observing that it was now late and
that Anselmo did not call, determined to go in and ascertain if his
indisposition was increasing, and found him lying on his face, his body
partly in the bed, partly on the writing-table, on which he lay with
the written paper open and the pen still in his hand. Having first
called to him without receiving any answer, his host approached him,
and taking him by the hand, found that it was cold, and saw that he was
dead. Greatly surprised and distressed he summoned the household to
witness the sad fate