ged him to give him what was left in the pigskin, which
was no small quantity. Don Quixote consented, and he, taking it with
both hands, in good faith and with a better will, gulped down and
drained off very little less than his master. But the fact is, that the
stomach of poor Sancho was of necessity not so delicate as that of his
master, and so, before vomiting, he was seized with such gripings and
retchings, and such sweats and faintness, that verily and truly he
believed his last hour had come, and finding himself so racked and
tormented he cursed the balsam and the thief that had given it to him.

Don Quixote seeing him in this state said, “It is my belief, Sancho,
that this mischief comes of thy not being dubbed a knight, for I am
persuaded this liquor cannot be good for those who are not so.”

“If your worship knew that,” returned Sancho—“woe betide me and all my
kindred!—why did you let me taste it?”

At this moment the draught took effect, and the poor squire began to
discharge both ways at such a rate that the rush mat on which he had
thrown himself and the canvas blanket he had covering him were fit for
nothing afterwards. He sweated and perspired with such paroxysms and
convulsions that not only he himself but all present thought his end
had come. This tempest and tribulation lasted about two hours, at the
end of which he was left, not like his master, but so weak and
exhausted that he could not stand. Don Quixote, however, who, as has
been said, felt himself relieved and well, was eager to take his
departure at once in quest of adventures, as it seemed to him that all
the time he loitered there was a fraud upon the world and those in it
who stood in need of his help and protection, all the more when he had
the security and confidence his balsam afforded him; and so, urged by
this impulse, he saddled Rocinante himself and put the pack-saddle on
his squire’s beast, whom likewise he helped to dress and mount the ass;
after which he mounted his horse and turning to a corner of the inn he
laid hold of a pike that stood there, to serve him by way of a lance.
All that were in the inn, who were more than twenty persons, stood
watching him; the innkeeper’s daughter was likewise observing him, and
he too never took his eyes off her, and from time to time fetched a
sigh that he seemed to pluck up from the depths of his bowels; but they
all thought it must be from the pain he felt in his ribs; at any rate
they who had seen him plastered the night before thought so.

As soon as they were both mounted, at the gate of the inn, he called to
the host and said in a very grave and measured voice, “Many and great
are the favours, Señor Alcaide, that I have received in this castle of
yours, and I remain under the deepest obligation to be grateful to you
for them all the days of my life; if I can repay them in avenging you
of any arrogant foe who may have wronged you, know that my calling is
no other than to aid the weak, to avenge those who suffer wrong, and to
chastise perfidy. Search your memory, and if you find anything of this
kind you need only tell me of it, and I promise you by the order of
knighthood which I have received to procure you satisfaction and
reparation to the utmost of your desire.”

The innkeeper replied to him with equal calmness, “Sir Knight, I do not
want your worship to avenge me of any wrong, because when any is done
me I can take what vengeance seems good to me; the only thing I want is
that you pay me the score that you have run up in the inn last night,
as well for the straw and barley for your two beasts, as for supper and
beds.”



c16c.jpg (326K)

Full Size




“Then this is an inn?” said Don Quixote.

“And a very respectable one,” said the innkeeper.

“I have been under a mistake all this time,” answered Don Quixote, “for
in truth I thought it was a castle, and not a bad one; but since it
appears that it is not a castle but an i