member that it was not becoming that anyone should occupy
his seat at the table during his absence, and if he acted thus from not
feeling confidence that she would be able to manage his house, let him
try her this time, and he would find by experience that she was equal
to greater responsibilities. Anselmo replied that it was his pleasure
to have it so, and that she had only to submit and obey. Camilla said
she would do so, though against her will.

Anselmo went, and the next day Lothario came to his house, where he was
received by Camilla with a friendly and modest welcome; but she never
suffered Lothario to see her alone, for she was always attended by her
men and women servants, especially by a handmaid of hers, Leonela by
name, to whom she was much attached (for they had been brought up
together from childhood in her father’s house), and whom she had kept
with her after her marriage with Anselmo. The first three days Lothario
did not speak to her, though he might have done so when they removed
the cloth and the servants retired to dine hastily; for such were
Camilla’s orders; nay more, Leonela had directions to dine earlier than
Camilla and never to leave her side. She, however, having her thoughts
fixed upon other things more to her taste, and wanting that time and
opportunity for her own pleasures, did not always obey her mistress’s
commands, but on the contrary left them alone, as if they had ordered
her to do so; but the modest bearing of Camilla, the calmness of her
countenance, the composure of her aspect were enough to bridle the
tongue of Lothario. But the influence which the many virtues of Camilla
exerted in imposing silence on Lothario’s tongue proved mischievous for
both of them, for if his tongue was silent his thoughts were busy, and
could dwell at leisure upon the perfections of Camilla’s goodness and
beauty one by one, charms enough to warm with love a marble statue, not
to say a heart of flesh. Lothario gazed upon her when he might have
been speaking to her, and thought how worthy of being loved she was;
and thus reflection began little by little to assail his allegiance to
Anselmo, and a thousand times he thought of withdrawing from the city
and going where Anselmo should never see him nor he see Camilla. But
already the delight he found in gazing on her interposed and held him
fast. He put a constraint upon himself, and struggled to repel and
repress the pleasure he found in contemplating Camilla; when alone he
blamed himself for his weakness, called himself a bad friend, nay a bad
Christian; then he argued the matter and compared himself with Anselmo;
always coming to the conclusion that the folly and rashness of Anselmo
had been worse than his faithlessness, and that if he could excuse his
intentions as easily before God as with man, he had no reason to fear
any punishment for his offence.

In short the beauty and goodness of Camilla, joined with the
opportunity which the blind husband had placed in his hands, overthrew
the loyalty of Lothario; and giving heed to nothing save the object
towards which his inclinations led him, after Anselmo had been three
days absent, during which he had been carrying on a continual struggle
with his passion, he began to make love to Camilla with so much
vehemence and warmth of language that she was overwhelmed with
amazement, and could only rise from her place and retire to her room
without answering him a word. But the hope which always springs up with
love was not weakened in Lothario by this repelling demeanour; on the
contrary his passion for Camilla increased, and she discovering in him
what she had never expected, knew not what to do; and considering it
neither safe nor right to give him the chance or opportunity of
speaking to her again, she resolved to send, as she did that very
night, one of her servants with a letter to Anselmo, in which she
addressed the following words to him.



CHAPTER XXXIV.