ho Panza’s view of these cases
is quite right.”

“Sirs, not so fast,” said Don Quixote, “‘in last year’s nests there are
no birds this year.’ I was mad, now I am in my senses; I was Don
Quixote of La Mancha, I am now, as I said, Alonso Quixano the Good; and
may my repentance and sincerity restore me to the esteem you used to
have for me; and now let Master Notary proceed.

“Item, I leave all my property absolutely to Antonia Quixana my niece,
here present, after all has been deducted from the most available
portion of it that may be required to satisfy the bequests I have made.
And the first disbursement I desire to be made is the payment of the
wages I owe for the time my housekeeper has served me, with twenty
ducats, over and above, for a gown. The curate and the bachelor Samson
Carrasco, now present, I appoint my executors.

“Item, it is my wish that if Antonia Quixana, my niece, desires to
marry, she shall marry a man of whom it shall be first of all
ascertained by information taken that he does not know what books of
chivalry are; and if it should be proved that he does, and if, in spite
of this, my niece insists upon marrying him, and does marry him, then
that she shall forfeit the whole of what I have left her, which my
executors shall devote to works of charity as they please.

“Item, I entreat the aforesaid gentlemen my executors, that, if any
happy chance should lead them to discover the author who is said to
have written a history now going about under the title of ‘Second Part
of the Achievements of Don Quixote of La Mancha,’ they beg of him on my
behalf as earnestly as they can to forgive me for having been, without
intending it, the cause of his writing so many and such monstrous
absurdities as he has written in it; for I am leaving the world with a
feeling of compunction at having provoked him to write them.”

With this he closed his will, and a faintness coming over him he
stretched himself out at full length on the bed. All were in a flutter
and made haste to relieve him, and during the three days he lived after
that on which he made his will he fainted away very often. The house
was all in confusion; but still the niece ate and the housekeeper drank
and Sancho Panza enjoyed himself; for inheriting property wipes out or
softens down in the heir the feeling of grief the dead man might be
expected to leave behind him.



p74b.jpg (391K)

Full Size



At last Don Quixote’s end came, after he had received all the
sacraments, and had in full and forcible terms expressed his
detestation of books of chivalry. The notary was there at the time, and
he said that in no book of chivalry had he ever read of any
knight-errant dying in his bed so calmly and so like a Christian as Don
Quixote, who amid the tears and lamentations of all present yielded up
his spirit, that is to say died. On perceiving it the curate begged the
notary to bear witness that Alonso Quixano the Good, commonly called
Don Quixote of La Mancha, had passed away from this present life, and
died naturally; and said he desired this testimony in order to remove
the possibility of any other author save Cide Hamete Benengeli bringing
him to life again falsely and making interminable stories out of his
achievements.

Such was the end of the Ingenious Gentleman of La Mancha, whose village
Cide Hamete would not indicate precisely, in order to leave all the
towns and villages of La Mancha to contend among themselves for the
right to adopt him and claim him as a son, as the seven cities of
Greece contended for Homer. The lamentations of Sancho and the niece
and housekeeper are omitted here, as well as the new epitaphs upon his
tomb; Samson Carrasco, however, put the following lines:

A doughty gentleman lies here;
A stranger all his life to fear;
Nor in his death could Death prevail,
In that last hour, to make him quail.

He for the world but little cared;
And at his feats the world was