y for investing with an air of novelty the idea of a
dispairing shepherd and inflexible shepherdess. As a set-off against
this, the old historical and traditional ballads, and the true
pastorals, the songs and ballads of peasant life, were being collected
assiduously and printed in the cancioneros that succeeded one another
with increasing rapidity. But the most notable consequence, perhaps, of
the spread of printing was the flood of romances of chivalry that had
continued to pour from the press ever since Garci Ordoñez de Montalvo
had resuscitated “Amadis of Gaul” at the beginning of the century.

For a youth fond of reading, solid or light, there could have been no
better spot in Spain than Alcalá de Henares in the middle of the
sixteenth century. It was then a busy, populous university town,
something more than the enterprising rival of Salamanca, and altogether
a very different place from the melancholy, silent, deserted Alcalá the
traveller sees now as he goes from Madrid to Saragossa. Theology and
medicine may have been the strong points of the university, but the
town itself seems to have inclined rather to the humanities and light
literature, and as a producer of books Alcalá was already beginning to
compete with the older presses of Toledo, Burgos, Salamanca and
Seville.

A pendant to the picture Cervantes has given us of his first playgoings
might, no doubt, have been often seen in the streets of Alcalá at that
time; a bright, eager, tawny-haired boy peering into a book-shop where
the latest volumes lay open to tempt the public, wondering, it may be,
what that little book with the woodcut of the blind beggar and his boy,
that called itself “Vida de Lazarillo de Tormes, segunda impresion,”
could be about; or with eyes brimming over with merriment gazing at one
of those preposterous portraits of a knight-errant in outrageous
panoply and plumes with which the publishers of chivalry romances loved
to embellish the title-pages of their folios. If the boy was the father
of the man, the sense of the incongruous that was strong at fifty was
lively at ten, and some such reflections as these may have been the
true genesis of “Don Quixote.”

For his more solid education, we are told, he went to Salamanca. But
why Rodrigo de Cervantes, who was very poor, should have sent his son
to a university a hundred and fifty miles away when he had one at his
own door, would be a puzzle, if we had any reason for supposing that he
did so. The only evidence is a vague statement by Professor Tomas
Gonzalez, that he once saw an old entry of the matriculation of a
Miguel de Cervantes. This does not appear to have been ever seen again;
but even if it had, and if the date corresponded, it would prove
nothing, as there were at least two other Miguels born about the middle
of the century; one of them, moreover, a Cervantes Saavedra, a cousin,
no doubt, who was a source of great embarrassment to the biographers.

That he was a student neither at Salamanca nor at Alcalá is best proved
by his own works. No man drew more largely upon experience than he did,
and he has nowhere left a single reminiscence of student life—for the
“Tia Fingida,” if it be his, is not one—nothing, not even “a college
joke,” to show that he remembered days that most men remember best. All
that we know positively about his education is that Juan Lopez de
Hoyos, a professor of humanities and belles-lettres of some eminence,
calls him his “dear and beloved pupil.” This was in a little collection
of verses by different hands on the death of Isabel de Valois, second
queen of Philip II., published by the professor in 1569, to which
Cervantes contributed four pieces, including an elegy, and an epitaph
in the form of a sonnet. It is only by a rare chance that a “Lycidas”
finds its way into a volume of this sort, and Cervantes was no Milton.
His verses are no worse than such things usually are; so much, at
least, may be said 