le man, or
else say nothing.”

“Tales are always told in my country in the very way I am telling
this,” answered Sancho, “and I cannot tell it in any other, nor is it
right of your worship to ask me to make new customs.”

“Tell it as thou wilt,” replied Don Quixote; “and as fate will have it
that I cannot help listening to thee, go on.”

“And so, lord of my soul,” continued Sancho, as I have said, this
shepherd was in love with Torralva the shepherdess, who was a wild
buxom lass with something of the look of a man about her, for she had
little moustaches; I fancy I see her now.”

“Then you knew her?” said Don Quixote.

“I did not know her,” said Sancho, “but he who told me the story said
it was so true and certain that when I told it to another I might
safely declare and swear I had seen it all myself. And so in course of
time, the devil, who never sleeps and puts everything in confusion,
contrived that the love the shepherd bore the shepherdess turned into
hatred and ill-will, and the reason, according to evil tongues, was
some little jealousy she caused him that crossed the line and
trespassed on forbidden ground; and so much did the shepherd hate her
from that time forward that, in order to escape from her, he determined
to quit the country and go where he should never set eyes on her again.
Torralva, when she found herself spurned by Lope, was immediately
smitten with love for him, though she had never loved him before.”

“That is the natural way of women,” said Don Quixote, “to scorn the one
that loves them, and love the one that hates them: go on, Sancho.”

“It came to pass,” said Sancho, “that the shepherd carried out his
intention, and driving his goats before him took his way across the
plains of Estremadura to pass over into the Kingdom of Portugal.
Torralva, who knew of it, went after him, and on foot and barefoot
followed him at a distance, with a pilgrim’s staff in her hand and a
scrip round her neck, in which she carried, it is said, a bit of
looking-glass and a piece of a comb and some little pot or other of
paint for her face; but let her carry what she did, I am not going to
trouble myself to prove it; all I say is, that the shepherd, they say,
came with his flock to cross over the river Guadiana, which was at that
time swollen and almost overflowing its banks, and at the spot he came
to there was neither ferry nor boat nor anyone to carry him or his
flock to the other side, at which he was much vexed, for he perceived
that Torralva was approaching and would give him great annoyance with
her tears and entreaties; however, he went looking about so closely
that he discovered a fisherman who had alongside of him a boat so small
that it could only hold one person and one goat; but for all that he
spoke to him and agreed with him to carry himself and his three hundred
goats across. The fisherman got into the boat and carried one goat
over; he came back and carried another over; he came back again, and
again brought over another—let your worship keep count of the goats the
fisherman is taking across, for if one escapes the memory there will be
an end of the story, and it will be impossible to tell another word of
it. To proceed, I must tell you the landing place on the other side was
miry and slippery, and the fisherman lost a great deal of time in going
and coming; still he returned for another goat, and another, and
another.”

“Take it for granted he brought them all across,” said Don Quixote,
“and don’t keep going and coming in this way, or thou wilt not make an
end of bringing them over this twelvemonth.”

“How many have gone across so far?” said Sancho.

“How the devil do I know?” replied Don Quixote.

“There it is,” said Sancho, “what I told you, that you must keep a good
count; well then, by God, there is an end of the story, for there is no
going any farther.”

“How can that be?” said Don Quixote; “is it so essential to the story
to kn