agined. He did not seem to be
twenty years of age.

“Tell me, dog,” said the general, “what led thee to kill my soldiers,
when thou sawest it was impossible for thee to escape? Is that the way
to behave to chief galleys? Knowest thou not that rashness is not
valour? Faint prospects of success should make men bold, but not rash.”

The rais was about to reply, but the general could not at that moment
listen to him, as he had to hasten to receive the viceroy, who was now
coming on board the galley, and with him certain of his attendants and
some of the people.

“You have had a good chase, señor general,” said the viceroy.

“Your excellency shall soon see how good, by the game strung up to this
yard,” replied the general.

“How so?” returned the viceroy.

“Because,” said the general, “against all law, reason, and usages of
war they have killed on my hands two of the best soldiers on board
these galleys, and I have sworn to hang every man that I have taken,
but above all this youth who is the rais of the brigantine,” and he
pointed to him as he stood with his hands already bound and the rope
round his neck, ready for death.

The viceroy looked at him, and seeing him so well-favoured, so
graceful, and so submissive, he felt a desire to spare his life, the
comeliness of the youth furnishing him at once with a letter of
recommendation. He therefore questioned him, saying, “Tell me, rais,
art thou Turk, Moor, or renegade?”

To which the youth replied, also in Spanish, “I am neither Turk, nor
Moor, nor renegade.”

“What art thou, then?” said the viceroy.

“A Christian woman,” replied the youth.

“A woman and a Christian, in such a dress and in such circumstances! It
is more marvellous than credible,” said the viceroy.

“Suspend the execution of the sentence,” said the youth; “your
vengeance will not lose much by waiting while I tell you the story of
my life.”

What heart could be so hard as not to be softened by these words, at
any rate so far as to listen to what the unhappy youth had to say? The
general bade him say what he pleased, but not to expect pardon for his
flagrant offence. With this permission the youth began in these words.

“Born of Morisco parents, I am of that nation, more unhappy than wise,
upon which of late a sea of woes has poured down. In the course of our
misfortune I was carried to Barbary by two uncles of mine, for it was
in vain that I declared I was a Christian, as in fact I am, and not a
mere pretended one, or outwardly, but a true Catholic Christian. It
availed me nothing with those charged with our sad expatriation to
protest this, nor would my uncles believe it; on the contrary, they
treated it as an untruth and a subterfuge set up to enable me to remain
behind in the land of my birth; and so, more by force than of my own
will, they took me with them. I had a Christian mother, and a father
who was a man of sound sense and a Christian too; I imbibed the
Catholic faith with my mother’s milk, I was well brought up, and
neither in word nor in deed did I, I think, show any sign of being a
Morisco. To accompany these virtues, for such I hold them, my beauty,
if I possess any, grew with my growth; and great as was the seclusion
in which I lived it was not so great but that a young gentleman, Don
Gaspar Gregorio by name, eldest son of a gentleman who is lord of a
village near ours, contrived to find opportunities of seeing me. How he
saw me, how we met, how his heart was lost to me, and mine not kept
from him, would take too long to tell, especially at a moment when I am
in dread of the cruel cord that threatens me interposing between tongue
and throat; I will only say, therefore, that Don Gregorio chose to
accompany me in our banishment. He joined company with the Moriscoes
who were going forth from other villages, for he knew their language
very well, and on the voyage he struck up a friendship with my two
uncles who were carrying me wit