l might of
jealousy that wove the web of her sad story?



p60d.jpg (439K)

Full Size



Roque Guinart found his squires at the place to which he had ordered
them, and Don Quixote on Rocinante in the midst of them delivering a
harangue to them in which he urged them to give up a mode of life so
full of peril, as well to the soul as to the body; but as most of them
were Gascons, rough lawless fellows, his speech did not make much
impression on them. Roque on coming up asked Sancho if his men had
returned and restored to him the treasures and jewels they had stripped
off Dapple. Sancho said they had, but that three kerchiefs that were
worth three cities were missing.

“What are you talking about, man?” said one of the bystanders; “I have
got them, and they are not worth three reals.”

“That is true,” said Don Quixote; “but my squire values them at the
rate he says, as having been given me by the person who gave them.”

Roque Guinart ordered them to be restored at once; and making his men
fall in in line he directed all the clothing, jewellery, and money that
they had taken since the last distribution to be produced; and making a
hasty valuation, and reducing what could not be divided into money, he
made shares for the whole band so equitably and carefully, that in no
case did he exceed or fall short of strict distributive justice.

When this had been done, and all left satisfied, Roque observed to Don
Quixote, “If this scrupulous exactness were not observed with these
fellows there would be no living with them.”

Upon this Sancho remarked, “From what I have seen here, justice is such
a good thing that there is no doing without it, even among the thieves
themselves.”

One of the squires heard this, and raising the butt-end of his
harquebuss would no doubt have broken Sancho’s head with it had not
Roque Guinart called out to him to hold his hand. Sancho was frightened
out of his wits, and vowed not to open his lips so long as he was in
the company of these people.

At this instant one or two of those squires who were posted as
sentinels on the roads, to watch who came along them and report what
passed to their chief, came up and said, “Señor, there is a great troop
of people not far off coming along the road to Barcelona.”

To which Roque replied, “Hast thou made out whether they are of the
sort that are after us, or of the sort we are after?”

“The sort we are after,” said the squire.

“Well then, away with you all,” said Roque, “and bring them here to me
at once without letting one of them escape.”



p60e.jpg (420K)

Full Size



They obeyed, and Don Quixote, Sancho, and Roque, left by themselves,
waited to see what the squires brought, and while they were waiting
Roque said to Don Quixote, “It must seem a strange sort of life to
Señor Don Quixote, this of ours, strange adventures, strange incidents,
and all full of danger; and I do not wonder that it should seem so, for
in truth I must own there is no mode of life more restless or anxious
than ours. What led me into it was a certain thirst for vengeance,
which is strong enough to disturb the quietest hearts. I am by nature
tender-hearted and kindly, but, as I said, the desire to revenge myself
for a wrong that was done me so overturns all my better impulses that I
keep on in this way of life in spite of what conscience tells me; and
as one depth calls to another, and one sin to another sin, revenges
have linked themselves together, and I have taken upon myself not only
my own but those of others: it pleases God, however, that, though I see
myself in this maze of entanglements, I do not lose all hope of
escaping from it and reaching a safe port.”

Don Quixote was amazed to hear Roque utter such excellent and just
sentiments, for he did not think that among those who followed such
trades as robbing, murdering, and waylaying, there could be anyone
capable of a virtuous thought, and he said in