oose to remember.”

“If I were to try to forget the thwacks they gave me,” said Sancho, “my
weals would not let me, for they are still fresh on my ribs.”

“Hush, Sancho,” said Don Quixote, “and don’t interrupt the bachelor,
whom I entreat to go on and tell all that is said about me in this
history.”

“And about me,” said Sancho, “for they say, too, that I am one of the
principal presonages in it.”

“Personages, not presonages, friend Sancho,” said Samson.

“What! Another word-catcher!” said Sancho; “if that’s to be the way we
shall not make an end in a lifetime.”

“May God shorten mine, Sancho,” returned the bachelor, “if you are not
the second person in the history, and there are even some who would
rather hear you talk than the cleverest in the whole book; though there
are some, too, who say you showed yourself over-credulous in believing
there was any possibility in the government of that island offered you
by Señor Don Quixote.”

“There is still sunshine on the wall,” said Don Quixote; “and when
Sancho is somewhat more advanced in life, with the experience that
years bring, he will be fitter and better qualified for being a
governor than he is at present.”

“By God, master,” said Sancho, “the island that I cannot govern with
the years I have, I’ll not be able to govern with the years of
Methuselah; the difficulty is that the said island keeps its distance
somewhere, I know not where; and not that there is any want of head in
me to govern it.”

“Leave it to God, Sancho,” said Don Quixote, “for all will be and
perhaps better than you think; no leaf on the tree stirs but by God’s
will.”

“That is true,” said Samson; “and if it be God’s will, there will not
be any want of a thousand islands, much less one, for Sancho to
govern.”

“I have seen governors in these parts,” said Sancho, “that are not to
be compared to my shoe-sole; and for all that they are called ‘your
lordship’ and served on silver.”

“Those are not governors of islands,” observed Samson, “but of other
governments of an easier kind: those that govern islands must at least
know grammar.”

“I could manage the gram well enough,” said Sancho; “but for the mar I
have neither leaning nor liking, for I don’t know what it is; but
leaving this matter of the government in God’s hands, to send me
wherever it may be most to his service, I may tell you, señor bachelor
Samson Carrasco, it has pleased me beyond measure that the author of
this history should have spoken of me in such a way that what is said
of me gives no offence; for, on the faith of a true squire, if he had
said anything about me that was at all unbecoming an old Christian,
such as I am, the deaf would have heard of it.”

“That would be working miracles,” said Samson.

“Miracles or no miracles,” said Sancho, “let everyone mind how he
speaks or writes about people, and not set down at random the first
thing that comes into his head.”

“One of the faults they find with this history,” said the bachelor, “is
that its author inserted in it a novel called ‘The Ill-advised
Curiosity;’ not that it is bad or ill-told, but that it is out of place
and has nothing to do with the history of his worship Señor Don
Quixote.”

“I will bet the son of a dog has mixed the cabbages and the baskets,”
said Sancho.

“Then, I say,” said Don Quixote, “the author of my history was no sage,
but some ignorant chatterer, who, in a haphazard and heedless way, set
about writing it, let it turn out as it might, just as Orbaneja, the
painter of Úbeda, used to do, who, when they asked him what he was
painting, answered, ‘What it may turn out.’ Sometimes he would paint a
cock in such a fashion, and so unlike, that he had to write alongside
of it in Gothic letters, ‘This is a cock;’ and so it will be with my
history, which will require a commentary to make it intelligible.”

“No fear of that,” returned Samson, “for it is so plain that there is
nothing in it to p