 are, were and will be, the work of fame that mortals desire as
a reward and a portion of the immortality their famous deeds deserve;
though we Catholic Christians and knights-errant look more to that
future glory that is everlasting in the ethereal regions of heaven than
to the vanity of the fame that is to be acquired in this present
transitory life; a fame that, however long it may last, must after all
end with the world itself, which has its own appointed end. So that, O
Sancho, in what we do we must not overpass the bounds which the
Christian religion we profess has assigned to us. We have to slay pride
in giants, envy by generosity and nobleness of heart, anger by calmness
of demeanour and equanimity, gluttony and sloth by the spareness of our
diet and the length of our vigils, lust and lewdness by the loyalty we
preserve to those whom we have made the mistresses of our thoughts,
indolence by traversing the world in all directions seeking
opportunities of making ourselves, besides Christians, famous knights.
Such, Sancho, are the means by which we reach those extremes of praise
that fair fame carries with it.”

“All that your worship has said so far,” said Sancho, “I have
understood quite well; but still I would be glad if your worship would
dissolve a doubt for me, which has just this minute come into my mind.”

“Solve, thou meanest, Sancho,” said Don Quixote; “say on, in God’s
name, and I will answer as well as I can.”

“Tell me, señor,” Sancho went on to say, “those Julys or Augusts, and
all those venturous knights that you say are now dead—where are they
now?”

“The heathens,” replied Don Quixote, “are, no doubt, in hell; the
Christians, if they were good Christians, are either in purgatory or in
heaven.”

“Very good,” said Sancho; “but now I want to know—the tombs where the
bodies of those great lords are, have they silver lamps before them, or
are the walls of their chapels ornamented with crutches,
winding-sheets, tresses of hair, legs and eyes in wax? Or what are they
ornamented with?”

To which Don Quixote made answer: “The tombs of the heathens were
generally sumptuous temples; the ashes of Julius Cæsar’s body were
placed on the top of a stone pyramid of vast size, which they now call
in Rome Saint Peter’s needle. The emperor Hadrian had for a tomb a
castle as large as a good-sized village, which they called the _Moles
Adriani_, and is now the castle of St. Angelo in Rome. The queen
Artemisia buried her husband Mausolus in a tomb which was reckoned one
of the seven wonders of the world; but none of these tombs, or of the
many others of the heathens, were ornamented with winding-sheets or any
of those other offerings and tokens that show that they who are buried
there are saints.”

“That’s the point I’m coming to,” said Sancho; “and now tell me, which
is the greater work, to bring a dead man to life or to kill a giant?”

“The answer is easy,” replied Don Quixote; “it is a greater work to
bring to life a dead man.”

“Now I have got you,” said Sancho; “in that case the fame of them who
bring the dead to life, who give sight to the blind, cure cripples,
restore health to the sick, and before whose tombs there are lamps
burning, and whose chapels are filled with devout folk on their knees
adoring their relics be a better fame in this life and in the other
than that which all the heathen emperors and knights-errant that have
ever been in the world have left or may leave behind them?”

“That I grant, too,” said Don Quixote.

“Then this fame, these favours, these privileges, or whatever you call
it,” said Sancho, “belong to the bodies and relics of the saints who,
with the approbation and permission of our holy mother Church, have
lamps, tapers, winding-sheets, crutches, pictures, eyes and legs, by
means of which they increase devotion and add to their own Christian
reputation. Kings carry the bodies or relics of saints on their
shoulders, and kis