se vile enchanters. I invented all that to escape my master’s
scolding, and not with any intention of hurting him; and if it has
turned out differently, there is a God in heaven who judges our
hearts.”

“That is true,” said the duchess; “but tell me, Sancho, what is this
you say about the cave of Montesinos, for I should like to know.”

Sancho upon this related to her, word for word, what has been said
already touching that adventure, and having heard it the duchess said,
“From this occurrence it may be inferred that, as the great Don Quixote
says he saw there the same country wench Sancho saw on the way from El
Toboso, it is, no doubt, Dulcinea, and that there are some very active
and exceedingly busy enchanters about.”

“So I say,” said Sancho, “and if my lady Dulcinea is enchanted, so much
the worse for her, and I’m not going to pick a quarrel with my master’s
enemies, who seem to be many and spiteful. The truth is that the one I
saw was a country wench, and I set her down to be a country wench; and
if that was Dulcinea it must not be laid at my door, nor should I be
called to answer for it or take the consequences. But they must go
nagging at me at every step—‘Sancho said it, Sancho did it, Sancho
here, Sancho there,’ as if Sancho was nobody at all, and not that same
Sancho Panza that’s now going all over the world in books, so Samson
Carrasco told me, and he’s at any rate one that’s a bachelor of
Salamanca; and people of that sort can’t lie, except when the whim
seizes them or they have some very good reason for it. So there’s no
occasion for anybody to quarrel with me; and then I have a good
character, and, as I have heard my master say, ‘a good name is better
than great riches;’ let them only stick me into this government and
they’ll see wonders, for one who has been a good squire will be a good
governor.”

“All worthy Sancho’s observations,” said the duchess, “are Catonian
sentences, or at any rate out of the very heart of Michael Verino
himself, who _florentibus occidit annis_. In fact, to speak in his own
style, ‘under a bad cloak there’s often a good drinker.’”

“Indeed, señora,” said Sancho, “I never yet drank out of wickedness;
from thirst I have very likely, for I have nothing of the hypocrite in
me; I drink when I’m inclined, or, if I’m not inclined, when they offer
it to me, so as not to look either strait-laced or ill-bred; for when a
friend drinks one’s health what heart can be so hard as not to return
it? But if I put on my shoes I don’t dirty them; besides, squires to
knights-errant mostly drink water, for they are always wandering among
woods, forests and meadows, mountains and crags, without a drop of wine
to be had if they gave their eyes for it.”

“So I believe,” said the duchess; “and now let Sancho go and take his
sleep, and we will talk by-and-by at greater length, and settle how he
may soon go and stick himself into the government, as he says.”

Sancho once more kissed the duchess’s hand, and entreated her to let
good care be taken of his Dapple, for he was the light of his eyes.

“What is Dapple?” said the duchess.

“My ass,” said Sancho, “which, not to mention him by that name, I’m
accustomed to call Dapple; I begged this lady duenna here to take care
of him when I came into the castle, and she got as angry as if I had
said she was ugly or old, though it ought to be more natural and proper
for duennas to feed asses than to ornament chambers. God bless me! what
a spite a gentleman of my village had against these ladies!”

“He must have been some clown,” said Doña Rodriguez the duenna; “for if
he had been a gentleman and well-born he would have exalted them higher
than the horns of the moon.”

“That will do,” said the duchess; “no more of this; hush, Doña
Rodriguez, and let Señor Panza rest easy and leave the treatment of
Dapple in my charge, for as he is a treasure of Sancho’s, I’ll put him
on the apple of my eye.”

“It will b