, I would drop down dead on the spot.”

“Nay, then, husband,” said Teresa; “let the hen live, though it be with
her pip, live, and let the devil take all the governments in the world;
you came out of your mother’s womb without a government, you have lived
until now without a government, and when it is God’s will you will go,
or be carried, to your grave without a government. How many there are
in the world who live without a government, and continue to live all
the same, and are reckoned in the number of the people. The best sauce
in the world is hunger, and as the poor are never without that, they
always eat with a relish. But mind, Sancho, if by good luck you should
find yourself with some government, don’t forget me and your children.
Remember that Sanchico is now full fifteen, and it is right he should
go to school, if his uncle the abbot has a mind to have him trained for
the Church. Consider, too, that your daughter Mari-Sancha will not die
of grief if we marry her; for I have my suspicions that she is as eager
to get a husband as you to get a government; and, after all, a daughter
looks better ill married than well whored.”

“By my faith,” replied Sancho, “if God brings me to get any sort of a
government, I intend, wife, to make such a high match for Mari-Sancha
that there will be no approaching her without calling her ‘my lady.”

“Nay, Sancho,” returned Teresa; “marry her to her equal, that is the
safest plan; for if you put her out of wooden clogs into high-heeled
shoes, out of her grey flannel petticoat into hoops and silk gowns, out
of the plain ‘Marica’ and ‘thou,’ into ‘Doña So-and-so’ and ‘my lady,’
the girl won’t know where she is, and at every turn she will fall into
a thousand blunders that will show the thread of her coarse homespun
stuff.”

“Tut, you fool,” said Sancho; “it will be only to practise it for two
or three years; and then dignity and decorum will fit her as easily as
a glove; and if not, what matter? Let her be ‘my lady,’ and never mind
what happens.”

“Keep to your own station, Sancho,” replied Teresa; “don’t try to raise
yourself higher, and bear in mind the proverb that says, ‘wipe the nose
of your neigbbour’s son, and take him into your house.’ A fine thing it
would be, indeed, to marry our Maria to some great count or grand
gentleman, who, when the humour took him, would abuse her and call her
clown-bred and clodhopper’s daughter and spinning wench. I have not
been bringing up my daughter for that all this time, I can tell you,
husband. Do you bring home money, Sancho, and leave marrying her to my
care; there is Lope Tocho, Juan Tocho’s son, a stout, sturdy young
fellow that we know, and I can see he does not look sour at the girl;
and with him, one of our own sort, she will be well married, and we
shall have her always under our eyes, and be all one family, parents
and children, grandchildren and sons-in-law, and the peace and blessing
of God will dwell among us; so don’t you go marrying her in those
courts and grand palaces where they won’t know what to make of her, or
she what to make of herself.”

“Why, you idiot and wife for Barabbas,” said Sancho, “what do you mean
by trying, without why or wherefore, to keep me from marrying my
daughter to one who will give me grandchildren that will be called
‘your lordship’? Look ye, Teresa, I have always heard my elders say
that he who does not know how to take advantage of luck when it comes
to him, has no right to complain if it gives him the go-by; and now
that it is knocking at our door, it will not do to shut it out; let us
go with the favouring breeze that blows upon us.”

It is this sort of talk, and what Sancho says lower down, that made the
translator of the history say he considered this chapter apocryphal.

“Don’t you see, you animal,” continued Sancho, “that it will be well
for me to drop into some profitable government that will lift us out of
the mire, and marry Mari-S