thy dusty poll!

I rave,—to favours such as these
    Unworthy to aspire;
Thy feet to tickle were enough
    For one so mean as I.

What caps, what slippers silver-laced,
    Would I on thee bestow!
What damask breeches make for thee;
    What fine long holland cloaks!

And I would give thee pearls that should
    As big as oak-galls show;
So matchless big that each might well
    Be called the great “Alone.”

Manchegan Nero, look not down
    From thy Tarpeian Rock
Upon this burning heart, nor add
    The fuel of thy wrath.

A virgin soft and young am I,
    Not yet fifteen years old;
(I’m only three months past fourteen,
    I swear upon my soul).

I hobble not nor do I limp,
    All blemish I’m without,
And as I walk my lily locks
    Are trailing on the ground.

And though my nose be rather flat,
    And though my mouth be wide,
My teeth like topazes exalt
    My beauty to the sky.

Thou knowest that my voice is sweet,
    That is if thou dost hear;
And I am moulded in a form
    Somewhat below the mean.

These charms, and many more, are thine,
    Spoils to thy spear and bow all;
A damsel of this house am I,
    By name Altisidora.




p44c.jpg (266K)

Full Size



Here the lay of the heart-stricken Altisidora came to an end, while the
warmly wooed Don Quixote began to feel alarm; and with a deep sigh he
said to himself, “O that I should be such an unlucky knight that no
damsel can set eyes on me but falls in love with me! O that the
peerless Dulcinea should be so unfortunate that they cannot let her
enjoy my incomparable constancy in peace! What would ye with her, ye
queens? Why do ye persecute her, ye empresses? Why ye pursue her, ye
virgins of from fourteen to fifteen? Leave the unhappy being to
triumph, rejoice and glory in the lot love has been pleased to bestow
upon her in surrendering my heart and yielding up my soul to her. Ye
love-smitten host, know that to Dulcinea only I am dough and
sugar-paste, flint to all others; for her I am honey, for you aloes.
For me Dulcinea alone is beautiful, wise, virtuous, graceful, and
high-bred, and all others are ill-favoured, foolish, light, and
low-born. Nature sent me into the world to be hers and no other’s;
Altisidora may weep or sing, the lady for whose sake they belaboured me
in the castle of the enchanted Moor may give way to despair, but I must
be Dulcinea’s, boiled or roast, pure, courteous, and chaste, in spite
of all the magic-working powers on earth.” And with that he shut the
window with a bang, and, as much out of temper and out of sorts as if
some great misfortune had befallen him, stretched himself on his bed,
where we will leave him for the present, as the great Sancho Panza, who
is about to set up his famous government, now demands our attention.



p44e.jpg (145K)

Full Size



CHAPTER XLV.
OF HOW THE GREAT SANCHO PANZA TOOK POSSESSION OF HIS ISLAND, AND OF HOW
HE MADE A BEGINNING IN GOVERNING




p45a.jpg (141K)

Full Size



O perpetual discoverer of the antipodes, torch of the world, eye of
heaven, sweet stimulator of the water-coolers! Thimbraeus here, Phœbus
there, now archer, now physician, father of poetry, inventor of music;
thou that always risest and, notwithstanding appearances, never
settest! To thee, O Sun, by whose aid man begetteth man, to thee I
appeal to help me and lighten the darkness of my wit that I may be able
to proceed with scrupulous exactitude in giving an account of the great
Sancho Panza’s government; for without thee I feel myself weak, feeble,
and uncertain.

To come to the point, then—Sancho with all his attendants arrived at a
village of some thousand inhabitants, and one of the largest the duke
possessed. They informed him that it was called the island of
Barataria, either because the name of the village was Baratario, or
because of the joke by way of which the government had been conferred
upon him. On reaching 