dy, and begged of
her that it might be her good pleasure to permit herself to be seen by
her enslaved knight, and deign to bestow her blessing upon him, so that
he might thereby hope for a happy issue in all his encounters and
difficult enterprises. Sancho undertook to execute the task according
to the instructions, and to bring back an answer as good as the one he
brought back before.

“Go, my son,” said Don Quixote, “and be not dazed when thou findest
thyself exposed to the light of that sun of beauty thou art going to
seek. Happy thou, above all the squires in the world! Bear in mind, and
let it not escape thy memory, how she receives thee; if she changes
colour while thou art giving her my message; if she is agitated and
disturbed at hearing my name; if she cannot rest upon her cushion,
shouldst thou haply find her seated in the sumptuous state chamber
proper to her rank; and should she be standing, observe if she poises
herself now on one foot, now on the other; if she repeats two or three
times the reply she gives thee; if she passes from gentleness to
austerity, from asperity to tenderness; if she raises her hand to
smooth her hair though it be not disarranged. In short, my son, observe
all her actions and motions, for if thou wilt report them to me as they
were, I will gather what she hides in the recesses of her heart as
regards my love; for I would have thee know, Sancho, if thou knowest it
not, that with lovers the outward actions and motions they give way to
when their loves are in question are the faithful messengers that carry
the news of what is going on in the depths of their hearts. Go, my
friend, may better fortune than mine attend thee, and bring thee a
happier issue than that which I await in dread in this dreary
solitude.”

“I will go and return quickly,” said Sancho; “cheer up that little
heart of yours, master mine, for at the present moment you seem to have
got one no bigger than a hazel nut; remember what they say, that a
stout heart breaks bad luck, and that where there are no fletches there
are no pegs; and moreover they say, the hare jumps up where it’s not
looked for. I say this because, if we could not find my lady’s palaces
or castles to-night, now that it is daylight I count upon finding them
when I least expect it, and once found, leave it to me to manage her.”

“Verily, Sancho,” said Don Quixote, “thou dost always bring in thy
proverbs happily, whatever we deal with; may God give me better luck in
what I am anxious about.”

With this, Sancho wheeled about and gave Dapple the stick, and Don
Quixote remained behind, seated on his horse, resting in his stirrups
and leaning on the end of his lance, filled with sad and troubled
forebodings; and there we will leave him, and accompany Sancho, who
went off no less serious and troubled than he left his master; so much
so, that as soon as he had got out of the thicket, and looking round
saw that Don Quixote was not within sight, he dismounted from his ass,
and seating himself at the foot of a tree began to commune with
himself, saying, “Now, brother Sancho, let us know where your worship
is going. Are you going to look for some ass that has been lost? Not at
all. Then what are you going to look for? I am going to look for a
princess, that’s all; and in her for the sun of beauty and the whole
heaven at once. And where do you expect to find all this, Sancho?
Where? Why, in the great city of El Toboso. Well, and for whom are you
going to look for her? For the famous knight Don Quixote of La Mancha,
who rights wrongs, gives food to those who thirst and drink to the
hungry. That’s all very well, but do you know her house, Sancho? My
master says it will be some royal palace or grand castle. And have you
ever seen her by any chance? Neither I nor my master ever saw her. And
does it strike you that it would be just and right if the El Toboso
people, finding out that you were here with the intention 