pace, these nets took up the whole surface of
the globe, I would seek out new worlds through which to pass, so as not
to break them; and that ye may give some degree of credence to this
exaggerated language of mine, know that it is no less than Don Quixote
of La Mancha that makes this declaration to you, if indeed it be that
such a name has reached your ears.”

“Ah! friend of my soul,” instantly exclaimed the other shepherdess,
“what great good fortune has befallen us! Seest thou this gentleman we
have before us? Well then let me tell thee he is the most valiant and
the most devoted and the most courteous gentleman in all the world,
unless a history of his achievements that has been printed and I have
read is telling lies and deceiving us. I will lay a wager that this
good fellow who is with him is one Sancho Panza his squire, whose
drolleries none can equal.”

“That’s true,” said Sancho; “I am that same droll and squire you speak
of, and this gentleman is my master Don Quixote of La Mancha, the same
that’s in the history and that they talk about.”

“Oh, my friend,” said the other, “let us entreat him to stay; for it
will give our fathers and brothers infinite pleasure; I too have heard
just what thou hast told me of the valour of the one and the drolleries
of the other; and what is more, of him they say that he is the most
constant and loyal lover that was ever heard of, and that his lady is
one Dulcinea del Toboso, to whom all over Spain the palm of beauty is
awarded.”

“And justly awarded,” said Don Quixote, “unless, indeed, your
unequalled beauty makes it a matter of doubt. But spare yourselves the
trouble, ladies, of pressing me to stay, for the urgent calls of my
profession do not allow me to take rest under any circumstances.”

At this instant there came up to the spot where the four stood a
brother of one of the two shepherdesses, like them in shepherd costume,
and as richly and gaily dressed as they were. They told him that their
companion was the valiant Don Quixote of La Mancha, and the other
Sancho his squire, of whom he knew already from having read their
history. The gay shepherd offered him his services and begged that he
would accompany him to their tents, and Don Quixote had to give way and
comply. And now the game was started, and the nets were filled with a
variety of birds that deceived by the colour fell into the danger they
were flying from. Upwards of thirty persons, all gaily attired as
shepherds and shepherdesses, assembled on the spot, and were at once
informed who Don Quixote and his squire were, whereat they were not a
little delighted, as they knew of him already through his history. They
repaired to the tents, where they found tables laid out, and choicely,
plentifully, and neatly furnished. They treated Don Quixote as a person
of distinction, giving him the place of honour, and all observed him,
and were full of astonishment at the spectacle. At last the cloth being
removed, Don Quixote with great composure lifted up his voice and said:

“One of the greatest sins that men are guilty of is—some will say
pride—but I say ingratitude, going by the common saying that hell is
full of ingrates. This sin, so far as it has lain in my power, I have
endeavoured to avoid ever since I have enjoyed the faculty of reason;
and if I am unable to requite good deeds that have been done me by
other deeds, I substitute the desire to do so; and if that be not
enough I make them known publicly; for he who declares and makes known
the good deeds done to him would repay them by others if it were in his
power, and for the most part those who receive are the inferiors of
those who give. Thus, God is superior to all because he is the supreme
giver, and the offerings of man fall short by an infinite distance of
being a full return for the gifts of God; but gratitude in some degree
makes up for this deficiency and shortcoming. I therefore, grateful for
the favou