insult, inasmuch as it is not one. A fine thing it
would be if the people of the clock town were to be at loggerheads
every moment with everyone who called them by that name,—or the
Cazoleros, Berengeneros, Ballenatos, Jaboneros, or the bearers of all
the other names and titles that are always in the mouth of the boys and
common people! It would be a nice business indeed if all these
illustrious cities were to take huff and revenge themselves and go
about perpetually making trombones of their swords in every petty
quarrel! No, no; God forbid! There are four things for which sensible
men and well-ordered States ought to take up arms, draw their swords,
and risk their persons, lives, and properties. The first is to defend
the Catholic faith; the second, to defend one’s life, which is in
accordance with natural and divine law; the third, in defence of one’s
honour, family, and property; the fourth, in the service of one’s king
in a just war; and if to these we choose to add a fifth (which may be
included in the second), in defence of one’s country. To these five, as
it were capital causes, there may be added some others that may be just
and reasonable, and make it a duty to take up arms; but to take them up
for trifles and things to laugh at and be amused by rather than
offended, looks as though he who did so was altogether wanting in
common sense. Moreover, to take an unjust revenge (and there cannot be
any just one) is directly opposed to the sacred law that we
acknowledge, wherein we are commanded to do good to our enemies and to
love them that hate us; a command which, though it seems somewhat
difficult to obey, is only so to those who have in them less of God
than of the world, and more of the flesh than of the spirit; for Jesus
Christ, God and true man, who never lied, and could not and cannot lie,
said, as our law-giver, that his yoke was easy and his burden light; he
would not, therefore, have laid any command upon us that it was
impossible to obey. Thus, sirs, you are bound to keep quiet by human
and divine law.”

“The devil take me,” said Sancho to himself at this, “but this master
of mine is a theologian; or, if not, faith, he’s as like one as one egg
is like another.”

Don Quixote stopped to take breath, and, observing that silence was
still preserved, had a mind to continue his discourse, and would have
done so had not Sancho interposed with his smartness; for he, seeing
his master pause, took the lead, saying, “My lord Don Quixote of La
Mancha, who once was called the Knight of the Rueful Countenance, but
now is called the Knight of the Lions, is a gentleman of great
discretion who knows Latin and his mother tongue like a bachelor, and
in everything that he deals with or advises proceeds like a good
soldier, and has all the laws and ordinances of what they call combat
at his fingers’ ends; so you have nothing to do but to let yourselves
be guided by what he says, and on my head be it if it is wrong. Besides
which, you have been told that it is folly to take offence at merely
hearing a bray. I remember when I was a boy I brayed as often as I had
a fancy, without anyone hindering me, and so elegantly and naturally
that when I brayed all the asses in the town would bray; but I was none
the less for that the son of my parents who were greatly respected; and
though I was envied because of the gift by more than one of the high
and mighty ones of the town, I did not care two farthings for it; and
that you may see I am telling the truth, wait a bit and listen, for
this art, like swimming, once learnt is never forgotten;” and then,
taking hold of his nose, he began to bray so vigorously that all the
valleys around rang again.

One of those, however, that stood near him, fancying he was mocking
them, lifted up a long staff he had in his hand and smote him such a
blow with it that Sancho dropped helpless to the ground. Don Quixote,
seeing him so roughly handled, att