der,” said the other, “except to agree
to go back? Anything else is impossible.”

All this conversation between the two was overheard by the muleteer at
whose side Don Luis lay, and rising, he went to report what had taken
place to Don Fernando, Cardenio, and the others, who had by this time
dressed themselves; and told them how the man had addressed the youth
as “Don,” and what words had passed, and how he wanted him to return to
his father, which the youth was unwilling to do. With this, and what
they already knew of the rare voice that heaven had bestowed upon him,
they all felt very anxious to know more particularly who he was, and
even to help him if it was attempted to employ force against him; so
they hastened to where he was still talking and arguing with his
servant. Dorothea at this instant came out of her room, followed by
Doña Clara all in a tremor; and calling Cardenio aside, she told him in
a few words the story of the musician and Doña Clara, and he at the
same time told her what had happened, how his father’s servants had
come in search of him; but in telling her so, he did not speak low
enough but that Doña Clara heard what he said, at which she was so much
agitated that had not Dorothea hastened to support her she would have
fallen to the ground. Cardenio then bade Dorothea return to her room,
as he would endeavour to make the whole matter right, and they did as
he desired. All the four who had come in quest of Don Luis had now come
into the inn and surrounded him, urging him to return and console his
father at once and without a moment’s delay. He replied that he could
not do so on any account until he had concluded some business in which
his life, honour, and heart were at stake. The servants pressed him,
saying that most certainly they would not return without him, and that
they would take him away whether he liked it or not.

“You shall not do that,” replied Don Luis, “unless you take me dead;
though however you take me, it will be without life.”

By this time most of those in the inn had been attracted by the
dispute, but particularly Cardenio, Don Fernando, his companions, the
Judge, the curate, the barber, and Don Quixote; for he now considered
there was no necessity for mounting guard over the castle any longer.
Cardenio being already acquainted with the young man’s story, asked the
men who wanted to take him away, what object they had in seeking to
carry off this youth against his will.

“Our object,” said one of the four, “is to save the life of his father,
who is in danger of losing it through this gentleman’s disappearance.”

Upon this Don Luis exclaimed, “There is no need to make my affairs
public here; I am free, and I will return if I please; and if not, none
of you shall compel me.”

“Reason will compel your worship,” said the man, “and if it has no
power over you, it has power over us, to make us do what we came for,
and what it is our duty to do.”

“Let us hear what the whole affair is about,” said the Judge at this;
but the man, who knew him as a neighbour of theirs, replied, “Do you
not know this gentleman, Señor Judge? He is the son of your neighbour,
who has run away from his father’s house in a dress so unbecoming his
rank, as your worship may perceive.”

The judge on this looked at him more carefully and recognised him, and
embracing him said, “What folly is this, Señor Don Luis, or what can
have been the cause that could have induced you to come here in this
way, and in this dress, which so ill becomes your condition?”

Tears came into the eyes of the young man, and he was unable to utter a
word in reply to the Judge, who told the four servants not to be
uneasy, for all would be satisfactorily settled; and then taking Don
Luis by the hand, he drew him aside and asked the reason of his having
come there.

But while he was questioning him they heard a loud outcry at the gate
of the inn, the cause of which was that two