an four hundred thousand Moors and Arabs from all parts of
Africa, and in the train of all this great host such munitions and
engines of war, and so many pioneers that with their hands they might
have covered the Goletta and the fort with handfuls of earth. The first
to fall was the Goletta, until then reckoned impregnable, and it fell,
not by any fault of its defenders, who did all that they could and
should have done, but because experiment proved how easily
entrenchments could be made in the desert sand there; for water used to
be found at two palms depth, while the Turks found none at two yards;
and so by means of a quantity of sandbags they raised their works so
high that they commanded the walls of the fort, sweeping them as if
from a cavalier, so that no one was able to make a stand or maintain
the defence.

It was a common opinion that our men should not have shut themselves up
in the Goletta, but should have waited in the open at the
landing-place; but those who say so talk at random and with little
knowledge of such matters; for if in the Goletta and in the fort there
were barely seven thousand soldiers, how could such a small number,
however resolute, sally out and hold their own against numbers like
those of the enemy? And how is it possible to help losing a stronghold
that is not relieved, above all when surrounded by a host of determined
enemies in their own country? But many thought, and I thought so too,
that it was special favour and mercy which Heaven showed to Spain in
permitting the destruction of that source and hiding place of mischief,
that devourer, sponge, and moth of countless money, fruitlessly wasted
there to no other purpose save preserving the memory of its capture by
the invincible Charles V.; as if to make that eternal, as it is and
will be, these stones were needed to support it. The fort also fell;
but the Turks had to win it inch by inch, for the soldiers who defended
it fought so gallantly and stoutly that the number of the enemy killed
in twenty-two general assaults exceeded twenty-five thousand. Of three
hundred that remained alive not one was taken unwounded, a clear and
manifest proof of their gallantry and resolution, and how sturdily they
had defended themselves and held their post. A small fort or tower
which was in the middle of the lagoon under the command of Don Juan
Zanoguera, a Valencian gentleman and a famous soldier, capitulated upon
terms. They took prisoner Don Pedro Puertocarrero, commandant of the
Goletta, who had done all in his power to defend his fortress, and took
the loss of it so much to heart that he died of grief on the way to
Constantinople, where they were carrying him a prisoner. They also took
the commandant of the fort, Gabrio Cerbellon by name, a Milanese
gentleman, a great engineer and a very brave soldier. In these two
fortresses perished many persons of note, among whom was Pagano Doria,
knight of the Order of St. John, a man of generous disposition, as was
shown by his extreme liberality to his brother, the famous John Andrea
Doria; and what made his death the more sad was that he was slain by
some Arabs to whom, seeing that the fort was now lost, he entrusted
himself, and who offered to conduct him in the disguise of a Moor to
Tabarca, a small fort or station on the coast held by the Genoese
employed in the coral fishery. These Arabs cut off his head and carried
it to the commander of the Turkish fleet, who proved on them the truth
of our Castilian proverb, that “though the treason may please, the
traitor is hated;” for they say he ordered those who brought him the
present to be hanged for not having brought him alive.



c39b.jpg (371K)

Full Size




Among the Christians who were taken in the fort was one named Don Pedro
de Aguilar, a native of some place, I know not what, in Andalusia, who
had been ensign in the fort, a soldier of great repute and rare
intelligence, who had in particul