hand, it is closer and more literal, the
style is the same, the very same translations, or mistranslations,
occur in it, and it is extremely unlikely that a new translator would,
by suppressing his name, have allowed Shelton to carry off the credit.

In 1687 John Phillips, Milton’s nephew, produced a “Don Quixote” “made
English,” he says, “according to the humour of our modern language.”
His “Quixote” is not so much a translation as a travesty, and a
travesty that for coarseness, vulgarity, and buffoonery is almost
unexampled even in the literature of that day.

Ned Ward’s “Life and Notable Adventures of Don Quixote, merrily
translated into Hudibrastic Verse” (1700), can scarcely be reckoned a
translation, but it serves to show the light in which “Don Quixote” was
regarded at the time.

A further illustration may be found in the version published in 1712 by
Peter Motteux, who had then recently combined tea-dealing with
literature. It is described as “translated from the original by several
hands,” but if so all Spanish flavour has entirely evaporated under the
manipulation of the several hands. The flavour that it has, on the
other hand, is distinctly Franco-cockney. Anyone who compares it
carefully with the original will have little doubt that it is a
concoction from Shelton and the French of Filleau de Saint Martin, eked
out by borrowings from Phillips, whose mode of treatment it adopts. It
is, to be sure, more decent and decorous, but it treats “Don Quixote”
in the same fashion as a comic book that cannot be made too comic.

To attempt to improve the humour of “Don Quixote” by an infusion of
cockney flippancy and facetiousness, as Motteux’s operators did, is not
merely an impertinence like larding a sirloin of prize beef, but an
absolute falsification of the spirit of the book, and it is a proof of
the uncritical way in which “Don Quixote” is generally read that this
worse than worthless translation—worthless as failing to represent,
worse than worthless as misrepresenting—should have been favoured as it
has been.

It had the effect, however, of bringing out a translation undertaken
and executed in a very different spirit, that of Charles Jervas, the
portrait painter, and friend of Pope, Swift, Arbuthnot, and Gay. Jervas
has been allowed little credit for his work, indeed it may be said
none, for it is known to the world in general as Jarvis’s. It was not
published until after his death, and the printers gave the name
according to the current pronunciation of the day. It has been the most
freely used and the most freely abused of all the translations. It has
seen far more editions than any other, it is admitted on all hands to
be by far the most faithful, and yet nobody seems to have a good word
to say for it or for its author. Jervas no doubt prejudiced readers
against himself in his preface, where among many true words about
Shelton, Stevens, and Motteux, he rashly and unjustly charges Shelton
with having translated not from the Spanish, but from the Italian
version of Franciosini, which did not appear until ten years after
Shelton’s first volume. A suspicion of incompetence, too, seems to have
attached to him because he was by profession a painter and a mediocre
one (though he has given us the best portrait we have of Swift), and
this may have been strengthened by Pope’s remark that he “translated
‘Don Quixote’ without understanding Spanish.” He has been also charged
with borrowing from Shelton, whom he disparaged. It is true that in a
few difficult or obscure passages he has followed Shelton, and gone
astray with him; but for one case of this sort, there are fifty where
he is right and Shelton wrong. As for Pope’s dictum, anyone who
examines Jervas’s version carefully, side by side with the original,
will see that he was a sound Spanish scholar, incomparably a better one
than Shelton, except perhaps in mere colloquial Spanish. He was, in
fact, an honest, fa