 the truth, as well amid the promises and presents
of the rich man, as amid the sobs and entreaties of the poor.

“When equity may and should be brought into play, press not the utmost
rigour of the law against the guilty; for the reputation of the stern
judge stands not higher than that of the compassionate.

“If perchance thou permittest the staff of justice to swerve, let it be
not by the weight of a gift, but by that of mercy.

“If it should happen to thee to give judgment in the cause of one who
is thine enemy, turn thy thoughts away from thy injury and fix them on
the justice of the case.

“Let not thine own passion blind thee in another man’s cause; for the
errors thou wilt thus commit will be most frequently irremediable; or
if not, only to be remedied at the expense of thy good name and even of
thy fortune.

“If any handsome woman come to seek justice of thee, turn away thine
eyes from her tears and thine ears from her lamentations, and consider
deliberately the merits of her demand, if thou wouldst not have thy
reason swept away by her weeping, and thy rectitude by her sighs.

“Abuse not by word him whom thou hast to punish in deed, for the pain
of punishment is enough for the unfortunate without the addition of
thine objurgations.

“Bear in mind that the culprit who comes under thy jurisdiction is but
a miserable man subject to all the propensities of our depraved nature,
and so far as may be in thy power show thyself lenient and forbearing;
for though the attributes of God are all equal, to our eyes that of
mercy is brighter and loftier than that of justice.

“If thou followest these precepts and rules, Sancho, thy days will be
long, thy fame eternal, thy reward abundant, thy felicity unutterable;
thou wilt marry thy children as thou wouldst; they and thy
grandchildren will bear titles; thou wilt live in peace and concord
with all men; and, when life draws to a close, death will come to thee
in calm and ripe old age, and the light and loving hands of thy
great-grandchildren will close thine eyes.

“What I have thus far addressed to thee are instructions for the
adornment of thy mind; listen now to those which tend to that of the
body.”



p42e.jpg (17K)



CHAPTER XLIII.
OF THE SECOND SET OF COUNSELS DON QUIXOTE GAVE SANCHO PANZA




p43a.jpg (129K)

Full Size



Who, hearing the foregoing discourse of Don Quixote, would not have set
him down for a person of great good sense and greater rectitude of
purpose? But, as has been frequently observed in the course of this
great history, he only talked nonsense when he touched on chivalry, and
in discussing all other subjects showed that he had a clear and
unbiassed understanding; so that at every turn his acts gave the lie to
his intellect, and his intellect to his acts; but in the case of these
second counsels that he gave Sancho, he showed himself to have a lively
turn of humour, and displayed conspicuously his wisdom, and also his
folly.

Sancho listened to him with the deepest attention, and endeavoured to
fix his counsels in his memory, like one who meant to follow them and
by their means bring the full promise of his government to a happy
issue. Don Quixote, then, went on to say:

“With regard to the mode in which thou shouldst govern thy person and
thy house, Sancho, the first charge I have to give thee is to be clean,
and to cut thy nails, not letting them grow as some do, whose ignorance
makes them fancy that long nails are an ornament to their hands, as if
those excrescences they neglect to cut were nails, and not the talons
of a lizard-catching kestrel—a filthy and unnatural abuse.

“Go not ungirt and loose, Sancho; for disordered attire is a sign of an
unstable mind, unless indeed the slovenliness and slackness is to be
set down to craft, as was the common opinion in the case of Julius
Cæsar.

“Ascertain cautiously what thy office may be worth; and if it will
allow th