to show that I have governed like an angel.”

“By God the great Sancho is right,” said Doctor Recio, “and we should
let him go, for the duke will be beyond measure glad to see him.”

They all agreed to this, and allowed him to go, first offering to bear
him company and furnish him with all he wanted for his own comfort or
for the journey. Sancho said he did not want anything more than a
little barley for Dapple, and half a cheese and half a loaf for
himself; for the distance being so short there was no occasion for any
better or bulkier provant. They all embraced him, and he with tears
embraced all of them, and left them filled with admiration not only at
his remarks but at his firm and sensible resolution.



p53e.jpg (56K)



CHAPTER LIV.
WHICH DEALS WITH MATTERS RELATING TO THIS HISTORY AND NO OTHER




p54a.jpg (109K)

Full Size



The duke and duchess resolved that the challenge Don Quixote had, for
the reason already mentioned, given their vassal, should be proceeded
with; and as the young man was in Flanders, whither he had fled to
escape having Doña Rodriguez for a mother-in-law, they arranged to
substitute for him a Gascon lacquey, named Tosilos, first of all
carefully instructing him in all he had to do. Two days later the duke
told Don Quixote that in four days from that time his opponent would
present himself on the field of battle armed as a knight, and would
maintain that the damsel lied by half a beard, nay a whole beard, if
she affirmed that he had given her a promise of marriage. Don Quixote
was greatly pleased at the news, and promised himself to do wonders in
the lists, and reckoned it rare good fortune that an opportunity should
have offered for letting his noble hosts see what the might of his
strong arm was capable of; and so in high spirits and satisfaction he
awaited the expiration of the four days, which measured by his
impatience seemed spinning themselves out into four hundred ages. Let
us leave them to pass as we do other things, and go and bear Sancho
company, as mounted on Dapple, half glad, half sad, he paced along on
his road to join his master, in whose society he was happier than in
being governor of all the islands in the world. Well then, it so
happened that before he had gone a great way from the island of his
government (and whether it was island, city, town, or village that he
governed he never troubled himself to inquire) he saw coming along the
road he was travelling six pilgrims with staves, foreigners of that
sort that beg for alms singing; who as they drew near arranged
themselves in a line and lifting up their voices all together began to
sing in their own language something that Sancho could not understand,
with the exception of one word which sounded plainly “alms,” from which
he gathered that it was alms they asked for in their song; and being,
as Cide Hamete says, remarkably charitable, he took out of his alforjas
the half loaf and half cheese he had been provided with, and gave them
to them, explaining to them by signs that he had nothing else to give
them. They received them very gladly, but exclaimed, “Geld! Geld!”

“I don’t understand what you want of me, good people,” said Sancho.

On this one of them took a purse out of his bosom and showed it to
Sancho, by which he comprehended they were asking for money, and
putting his thumb to his throat and spreading his hand upwards he gave
them to understand that he had not the sign of a coin about him, and
urging Dapple forward he broke through them. But as he was passing, one
of them who had been examining him very closely rushed towards him, and
flinging his arms round him exclaimed in a loud voice and good Spanish,
“God bless me! What’s this I see? Is it possible that I hold in my arms
my dear friend, my good neighbour Sancho Panza? But there’s no doubt
about it, for I’m not asleep, nor am I drunk just now.”

Sancho was surprised to hear himself calle