 ages more
than ours, which I hold to be the golden of these latter days. Profit
by this advice, Sancho, and report to me clearly and faithfully the
truth of what thou knowest touching what I have demanded of thee.”

“That I will do with all my heart, master,” replied Sancho, “provided
your worship will not be vexed at what I say, as you wish me to say it
out in all its nakedness, without putting any more clothes on it than
it came to my knowledge in.”

“I will not be vexed at all,” returned Don Quixote; “thou mayest speak
freely, Sancho, and without any beating about the bush.”

“Well then,” said he, “first of all, I have to tell you that the common
people consider your worship a mighty great madman, and me no less a
fool. The hidalgos say that, not keeping within the bounds of your
quality of gentleman, you have assumed the ‘Don,’ and made a knight of
yourself at a jump, with four vine-stocks and a couple of acres of
land, and never a shirt to your back. The caballeros say they do not
want to have hidalgos setting up in opposition to them, particularly
squire hidalgos who polish their own shoes and darn their black
stockings with green silk.”

“That,” said Don Quixote, “does not apply to me, for I always go well
dressed and never patched; ragged I may be, but ragged more from the
wear and tear of arms than of time.”

“As to your worship’s valour, courtesy, accomplishments, and task,
there is a variety of opinions. Some say, ‘mad but droll;’ others,
‘valiant but unlucky;’ others, ‘courteous but meddling,’ and then they
go into such a number of things that they don’t leave a whole bone
either in your worship or in myself.”

“Recollect, Sancho,” said Don Quixote, “that wherever virtue exists in
an eminent degree it is persecuted. Few or none of the famous men that
have lived escaped being calumniated by malice. Julius Cæsar, the
boldest, wisest, and bravest of captains, was charged with being
ambitious, and not particularly cleanly in his dress, or pure in his
morals. Of Alexander, whose deeds won him the name of Great, they say
that he was somewhat of a drunkard. Of Hercules, him of the many
labours, it is said that he was lewd and luxurious. Of Don Galaor, the
brother of Amadis of Gaul, it was whispered that he was
over-quarrelsome, and of his brother that he was lachrymose. So that, O
Sancho, amongst all these calumnies against good men, mine may be let
pass, since they are no more than thou hast said.”

“That’s just where it is, body of my father!”

“Is there more, then?” asked Don Quixote.

“There’s the tail to be skinned yet,” said Sancho; “all so far is cakes
and fancy bread; but if your worship wants to know all about the
calumnies they bring against you, I will fetch you one this instant who
can tell you the whole of them without missing an atom; for last night
the son of Bartholomew Carrasco, who has been studying at Salamanca,
came home after having been made a bachelor, and when I went to welcome
him, he told me that your worship’s history is already abroad in books,
with the title of THE INGENIOUS GENTLEMAN DON QUIXOTE OF LA MANCHA; and
he says they mention me in it by my own name of Sancho Panza, and the
lady Dulcinea del Toboso too, and divers things that happened to us
when we were alone; so that I crossed myself in my wonder how the
historian who wrote them down could have known them.”

“I promise thee, Sancho,” said Don Quixote, “the author of our history
will be some sage enchanter; for to such nothing that they choose to
write about is hidden.”

“What!” said Sancho, “a sage and an enchanter! Why, the bachelor Samson
Carrasco (that is the name of him I spoke of) says the author of the
history is called Cide Hamete Berengena.”

“That is a Moorish name,” said Don Quixote.

“May be so,” replied Sancho; “for I have heard say that the Moors are
mostly great lovers of berengenas.”

“Thou must have mistaken the surname of this ‘Cide’—which m