 somewhat narrow path of
poetry and take the still narrower one of knight-errantry, wide enough,
however, to make you an emperor in the twinkling of an eye.”

In this speech Don Quixote wound up the evidence of his madness, but
still better in what he added when he said, “God knows, I would gladly
take Don Lorenzo with me to teach him how to spare the humble, and
trample the proud under foot, virtues that are part and parcel of the
profession I belong to; but since his tender age does not allow of it,
nor his praiseworthy pursuits permit it, I will simply content myself
with impressing it upon your worship that you will become famous as a
poet if you are guided by the opinion of others rather than by your
own; because no fathers or mothers ever think their own children
ill-favoured, and this sort of deception prevails still more strongly
in the case of the children of the brain.”

Both father and son were amazed afresh at the strange medley Don
Quixote talked, at one moment sense, at another nonsense, and at the
pertinacity and persistence he displayed in going through thick and
thin in quest of his unlucky adventures, which he made the end and aim
of his desires. There was a renewal of offers of service and
civilities, and then, with the gracious permission of the lady of the
castle, they took their departure, Don Quixote on Rocinante, and Sancho
on Dapple.



p18e.jpg (18K)



CHAPTER XIX.
IN WHICH IS RELATED THE ADVENTURE OF THE ENAMOURED SHEPHERD, TOGETHER
WITH OTHER TRULY DROLL INCIDENTS

p19a.jpg (131K)

Full Size



Don Quixote had gone but a short distance beyond Don Diego’s village,
when he fell in with a couple of either priests or students, and a
couple of peasants, mounted on four beasts of the ass kind. One of the
students carried, wrapped up in a piece of green buckram by way of a
portmanteau, what seemed to be a little linen and a couple of pairs of
ribbed stockings; the other carried nothing but a pair of new
fencing-foils with buttons. The peasants carried divers articles that
showed they were on their way from some large town where they had
bought them, and were taking them home to their village; and both
students and peasants were struck with the same amazement that
everybody felt who saw Don Quixote for the first time, and were dying
to know who this man, so different from ordinary men, could be. Don
Quixote saluted them, and after ascertaining that their road was the
same as his, made them an offer of his company, and begged them to
slacken their pace, as their young asses travelled faster than his
horse; and then, to gratify them, he told them in a few words who he
was and the calling and profession he followed, which was that of a
knight-errant seeking adventures in all parts of the world. He informed
them that his own name was Don Quixote of La Mancha, and that he was
called, by way of surname, the Knight of the Lions.

All this was Greek or gibberish to the peasants, but not so to the
students, who very soon perceived the crack in Don Quixote’s pate; for
all that, however, they regarded him with admiration and respect, and
one of them said to him, “If you, sir knight, have no fixed road, as it
is the way with those who seek adventures not to have any, let your
worship come with us; you will see one of the finest and richest
weddings that up to this day have ever been celebrated in La Mancha, or
for many a league round.”

Don Quixote asked him if it was some prince’s, that he spoke of it in
this way. “Not at all,” said the student; “it is the wedding of a
farmer and a farmer’s daughter, he the richest in all this country, and
she the fairest mortal ever set eyes on. The display with which it is
to be attended will be something rare and out of the common, for it
will be celebrated in a meadow adjoining the town of the bride, who is
called, _par excellence_, Quiteria the fair, as the bridegroom is
called Camacho the rich. She is