fore them to find him, and give him his lady’s answer; for that
perhaps might be enough to bring him away from the place without
putting them to all this trouble. They approved of what Sancho
proposed, and resolved to wait for him until he brought back word of
having found his master.

Sancho pushed on into the glens of the Sierra, leaving them in one
through which there flowed a little gentle rivulet, and where the rocks
and trees afforded a cool and grateful shade. It was an August day with
all the heat of one, and the heat in those parts is intense, and the
hour was three in the afternoon, all which made the spot the more
inviting and tempted them to wait there for Sancho’s return, which they
did. They were reposing, then, in the shade, when a voice unaccompanied
by the notes of any instrument, but sweet and pleasing in its tone,
reached their ears, at which they were not a little astonished, as the
place did not seem to them likely quarters for one who sang so well;
for though it is often said that shepherds of rare voice are to be
found in the woods and fields, this is rather a flight of the poet’s
fancy than the truth. And still more surprised were they when they
perceived that what they heard sung were the verses not of rustic
shepherds, but of the polished wits of the city; and so it proved, for
the verses they heard were these:

What makes my quest of happiness seem vain?
Disdain.
What bids me to abandon hope of ease?
Jealousies.
What holds my heart in anguish of suspense?
Absence.
If that be so, then for my grief
Where shall I turn to seek relief,
When hope on every side lies slain
By Absence, Jealousies, Disdain?

What the prime cause of all my woe doth prove?
Love.
What at my glory ever looks askance?
Chance.
Whence is permission to afflict me given?
Heaven.
If that be so, I but await
The stroke of a resistless fate,
Since, working for my woe, these three,
Love, Chance and Heaven, in league I see.

What must I do to find a remedy?
Die.
What is the lure for love when coy and strange?
Change.
What, if all fail, will cure the heart of sadness?
Madness.
If that be so, it is but folly
To seek a cure for melancholy:
Ask where it lies; the answer saith
In Change, in Madness, or in Death.


The hour, the summer season, the solitary place, the voice and skill of
the singer, all contributed to the wonder and delight of the two
listeners, who remained still waiting to hear something more; finding,
however, that the silence continued some little time, they resolved to
go in search of the musician who sang with so fine a voice; but just as
they were about to do so they were checked by the same voice, which
once more fell upon their ears, singing this

SONNET

When heavenward, holy Friendship, thou didst go
Soaring to seek thy home beyond the sky,
And take thy seat among the saints on high,
It was thy will to leave on earth below
Thy semblance, and upon it to bestow
Thy veil, wherewith at times hypocrisy,
Parading in thy shape, deceives the eye,
And makes its vileness bright as virtue show.
Friendship, return to us, or force the cheat
That wears it now, thy livery to restore,
By aid whereof sincerity is slain.
If thou wilt not unmask thy counterfeit,
This earth will be the prey of strife once more,
As when primæval discord held its reign.


The song ended with a deep sigh, and again the listeners remained
waiting attentively for the singer to resume; but perceiving that the
music had now turned to sobs and heart-rending moans they determined to
find out who the unhappy being could be whose voice was as rare as his
sighs were piteous, and they had not proceeded far when on turning the
corner of a rock they discovered a man of the same aspect and
appearance as Sancho had described to them when he told them the story
of Cardenio. He, showing no astonishment when he saw them, stood still
with his head bent down upon his breast like one in deep