he did not like to reply lest he should say something that
might disclose his trickery.

As they were engaged in this conversation they were overtaken by a man
who was following the same road behind them, mounted on a very handsome
flea-bitten mare, and dressed in a gaban of fine green cloth, with
tawny velvet facings, and a montera of the same velvet. The trappings
of the mare were of the field and jineta fashion, and of mulberry
colour and green. He carried a Moorish cutlass hanging from a broad
green and gold baldric; the buskins were of the same make as the
baldric; the spurs were not gilt, but lacquered green, and so brightly
polished that, matching as they did the rest of his apparel, they
looked better than if they had been of pure gold.

When the traveller came up with them he saluted them courteously, and
spurring his mare was passing them without stopping, but Don Quixote
called out to him, “Gallant sir, if so be your worship is going our
road, and has no occasion for speed, it would be a pleasure to me if we
were to join company.”

“In truth,” replied he on the mare, “I would not pass you so hastily
but for fear that horse might turn restive in the company of my mare.”

“You may safely hold in your mare, señor,” said Sancho in reply to
this, “for our horse is the most virtuous and well-behaved horse in the
world; he never does anything wrong on such occasions, and the only
time he misbehaved, my master and I suffered for it sevenfold; I say
again your worship may pull up if you like; for if she was offered to
him between two plates the horse would not hanker after her.”

The traveller drew rein, amazed at the trim and features of Don
Quixote, who rode without his helmet, which Sancho carried like a
valise in front of Dapple’s pack-saddle; and if the man in green
examined Don Quixote closely, still more closely did Don Quixote
examine the man in green, who struck him as being a man of
intelligence. In appearance he was about fifty years of age, with but
few grey hairs, an aquiline cast of features, and an expression between
grave and gay; and his dress and accoutrements showed him to be a man
of good condition. What he in green thought of Don Quixote of La Mancha
was that a man of that sort and shape he had never yet seen; he
marvelled at the length of his hair, his lofty stature, the lankness
and sallowness of his countenance, his armour, his bearing and his
gravity—a figure and picture such as had not been seen in those regions
for many a long day.

Don Quixote saw very plainly the attention with which the traveller was
regarding him, and read his curiosity in his astonishment; and
courteous as he was and ready to please everybody, before the other
could ask him any question he anticipated him by saying, “The
appearance I present to your worship being so strange and so out of the
common, I should not be surprised if it filled you with wonder; but you
will cease to wonder when I tell you, as I do, that I am one of those
knights who, as people say, go seeking adventures. I have left my home,
I have mortgaged my estate, I have given up my comforts, and committed
myself to the arms of Fortune, to bear me whithersoever she may please.
My desire was to bring to life again knight-errantry, now dead, and for
some time past, stumbling here, falling there, now coming down
headlong, now raising myself up again, I have carried out a great
portion of my design, succouring widows, protecting maidens, and giving
aid to wives, orphans, and minors, the proper and natural duty of
knights-errant; and, therefore, because of my many valiant and
Christian achievements, I have been already found worthy to make my way
in print to well-nigh all, or most, of the nations of the earth. Thirty
thousand volumes of my history have been printed, and it is on the
high-road to be printed thirty thousand thousands of times, if heaven
does not put a stop to it. In short, to sum up all i