tch them in a
twinkling.”

The majordomo kept his word, for he felt it against his conscience to
kill so wise a governor by hunger; particularly as he intended to have
done with him that same night, playing off the last joke he was
commissioned to practise upon him.

It came to pass, then, that after he had dined that day, in opposition
to the rules and aphorisms of Doctor Tirteafuera, as they were taking
away the cloth there came a courier with a letter from Don Quixote for
the governor. Sancho ordered the secretary to read it to himself, and
if there was nothing in it that demanded secrecy to read it aloud. The
secretary did so, and after he had skimmed the contents he said, “It
may well be read aloud, for what Señor Don Quixote writes to your
worship deserves to be printed or written in letters of gold, and it is
as follows.”

DON QUIXOTE OF LA MANCHA’S LETTER TO SANCHO PANZA, GOVERNOR OF THE
ISLAND OF BARATARIA.


When I was expecting to hear of thy stupidities and blunders, friend
Sancho, I have received intelligence of thy displays of good sense, for
which I give special thanks to heaven that can raise the poor from the
dunghill and of fools to make wise men. They tell me thou dost govern
as if thou wert a man, and art a man as if thou wert a beast, so great
is the humility wherewith thou dost comport thyself. But I would have
thee bear in mind, Sancho, that very often it is fitting and necessary
for the authority of office to resist the humility of the heart; for
the seemly array of one who is invested with grave duties should be
such as they require and not measured by what his own humble tastes may
lead him to prefer. Dress well; a stick dressed up does not look like a
stick; I do not say thou shouldst wear trinkets or fine raiment, or
that being a judge thou shouldst dress like a soldier, but that thou
shouldst array thyself in the apparel thy office requires, and that at
the same time it be neat and handsome. To win the good-will of the
people thou governest there are two things, among others, that thou
must do; one is to be civil to all (this, however, I told thee before),
and the other to take care that food be abundant, for there is nothing
that vexes the heart of the poor more than hunger and high prices. Make
not many proclamations; but those thou makest take care that they be
good ones, and above all that they be observed and carried out; for
proclamations that are not observed are the same as if they did not
exist; nay, they encourage the idea that the prince who had the wisdom
and authority to make them had not the power to enforce them; and laws
that threaten and are not enforced come to be like the log, the king of
the frogs, that frightened them at first, but that in time they
despised and mounted upon. Be a father to virtue and a stepfather to
vice. Be not always strict, nor yet always lenient, but observe a mean
between these two extremes, for in that is the aim of wisdom. Visit the
gaols, the slaughter-houses, and the market-places; for the presence of
the governor is of great importance in such places; it comforts the
prisoners who are in hopes of a speedy release, it is the bugbear of
the butchers who have then to give just weight, and it is the terror of
the market-women for the same reason. Let it not be seen that thou art
(even if perchance thou art, which I do not believe) covetous, a
follower of women, or a glutton; for when the people and those that
have dealings with thee become aware of thy special weakness they will
bring their batteries to bear upon thee in that quarter, till they have
brought thee down to the depths of perdition. Consider and reconsider,
con and con over again the advices and the instructions I gave thee
before thy departure hence to thy government, and thou wilt see that in
them, if thou dost follow them, thou hast a help at hand that will
lighten for thee the troubles and difficulties that beset governors at