n thou seest an opportunity for effecting my release I will
obey thee absolutely; but thou wilt see, Sancho, how mistaken thou art
in thy conception of my misfortune.”

The knight-errant and the ill-errant squire kept up their conversation
till they reached the place where the curate, the canon, and the
barber, who had already dismounted, were waiting for them. The carter
at once unyoked the oxen and left them to roam at large about the
pleasant green spot, the freshness of which seemed to invite, not
enchanted people like Don Quixote, but wide-awake, sensible folk like
his squire, who begged the curate to allow his master to leave the cage
for a little; for if they did not let him out, the prison might not be
as clean as the propriety of such a gentleman as his master required.
The curate understood him, and said he would very gladly comply with
his request, only that he feared his master, finding himself at
liberty, would take to his old courses and make off where nobody could
ever find him again.

“I will answer for his not running away,” said Sancho.

“And I also,” said the canon, “especially if he gives me his word as a
knight not to leave us without our consent.”

Don Quixote, who was listening to all this, said, “I give it;—moreover
one who is enchanted as I am cannot do as he likes with himself; for he
who had enchanted him could prevent his moving from one place for three
ages, and if he attempted to escape would bring him back flying.”—And
that being so, they might as well release him, particularly as it would
be to the advantage of all; for, if they did not let him out, he
protested he would be unable to avoid offending their nostrils unless
they kept their distance.

The canon took his hand, tied together as they both were, and on his
word and promise they unbound him, and rejoiced beyond measure he was
to find himself out of the cage. The first thing he did was to stretch
himself all over, and then he went to where Rocinante was standing and
giving him a couple of slaps on the haunches said, “I still trust in
God and in his blessed mother, O flower and mirror of steeds, that we
shall soon see ourselves, both of us, as we wish to be, thou with thy
master on thy back, and I mounted upon thee, following the calling for
which God sent me into the world.” And so saying, accompanied by
Sancho, he withdrew to a retired spot, from which he came back much
relieved and more eager than ever to put his squire’s scheme into
execution.

The canon gazed at him, wondering at the extraordinary nature of his
madness, and that in all his remarks and replies he should show such
excellent sense, and only lose his stirrups, as has been already said,
when the subject of chivalry was broached. And so, moved by compassion,
he said to him, as they all sat on the green grass awaiting the arrival
of the provisions:

“Is it possible, gentle sir, that the nauseous and idle reading of
books of chivalry can have had such an effect on your worship as to
upset your reason so that you fancy yourself enchanted, and the like,
all as far from the truth as falsehood itself is? How can there be any
human understanding that can persuade itself there ever was all that
infinity of Amadises in the world, or all that multitude of famous
knights, all those emperors of Trebizond, all those Felixmartes of
Hircania, all those palfreys, and damsels-errant, and serpents, and
monsters, and giants, and marvellous adventures, and enchantments of
every kind, and battles, and prodigious encounters, splendid costumes,
love-sick princesses, squires made counts, droll dwarfs, love letters,
billings and cooings, swashbuckler women, and, in a word, all that
nonsense the books of chivalry contain? For myself, I can only say that
when I read them, so long as I do not stop to think that they are all
lies and frivolity, they give me a certain amount of pleasure; but when
I come to consider what they are, I fling