nagers might say could persuade him that the
merits of his plays would not be recognised at last if they were only
given a fair chance. The old soldier of the Spanish Salamis was bent on
being the Aeschylus of Spain. He was to found a great national drama,
based on the true principles of art, that was to be the envy of all
nations; he was to drive from the stage the silly, childish plays, the
“mirrors of nonsense and models of folly” that were in vogue through
the cupidity of the managers and shortsightedness of the authors; he
was to correct and educate the public taste until it was ripe for
tragedies on the model of the Greek drama—like the “Numancia” for
instance—and comedies that would not only amuse but improve and
instruct. All this he was to do, could he once get a hearing: there was
the initial difficulty.

He shows plainly enough, too, that “Don Quixote” and the demolition of
the chivalry romances was not the work that lay next his heart. He was,
indeed, as he says himself in his preface, more a stepfather than a
father to “Don Quixote.” Never was great work so neglected by its
author. That it was written carelessly, hastily, and by fits and
starts, was not always his fault, but it seems clear he never read what
he sent to the press. He knew how the printers had blundered, but he
never took the trouble to correct them when the third edition was in
progress, as a man who really cared for the child of his brain would
have done. He appears to have regarded the book as little more than a
mere libro de entretenimiento, an amusing book, a thing, as he says in
the “Viaje,” “to divert the melancholy moody heart at any time or
season.” No doubt he had an affection for his hero, and was very proud
of Sancho Panza. It would have been strange indeed if he had not been
proud of the most humorous creation in all fiction. He was proud, too,
of the popularity and success of the book, and beyond measure
delightful is the naivete with which he shows his pride in a dozen
passages in the Second Part. But it was not the success he coveted. In
all probability he would have given all the success of “Don Quixote,”
nay, would have seen every copy of “Don Quixote” burned in the Plaza
Mayor, for one such success as Lope de Vega was enjoying on an average
once a week.

And so he went on, dawdling over “Don Quixote,” adding a chapter now
and again, and putting it aside to turn to “Persiles and
Sigismunda”—which, as we know, was to be the most entertaining book in
the language, and the rival of “Theagenes and Chariclea”—or finishing
off one of his darling comedies; and if Robles asked when “Don Quixote”
would be ready, the answer no doubt was: En breve—shortly, there was
time enough for that. At sixty-eight he was as full of life and hope
and plans for the future as a boy of eighteen.

Nemesis was coming, however. He had got as far as Chapter LIX, which at
his leisurely pace he could hardly have reached before October or
November 1614, when there was put into his hand a small octave lately
printed at Tarragona, and calling itself “Second Volume of the
Ingenious Gentleman Don Quixote of La Mancha: by the Licentiate Alonso
Fernandez de Avellaneda of Tordesillas.” The last half of Chapter LIX
and most of the following chapters of the Second Part give us some idea
of the effect produced upon him, and his irritation was not likely to
be lessened by the reflection that he had no one to blame but himself.
Had Avellaneda, in fact, been content with merely bringing out a
continuation to “Don Quixote,” Cervantes would have had no reasonable
grievance. His own intentions were expressed in the very vaguest
language at the end of the book; nay, in his last words, “forse altro
cantera con miglior plettro,” he seems actually to invite someone else
to continue the work, and he made no sign until eight years and a half
had gone by; by which time Avellaneda’s volume was no doubt written.

In fact Cervan