f thou comest alone.’”

In this way and with these reflections he seemed to himself to have
travelled rather more than half a league, when at last he perceived a
dim light that looked like daylight and found its way in on one side,
showing that this road, which appeared to him the road to the other
world, led to some opening.

Here Cide Hamete leaves him, and returns to Don Quixote, who in high
spirits and satisfaction was looking forward to the day fixed for the
battle he was to fight with him who had robbed Doña Rodriguez’s
daughter of her honour, for whom he hoped to obtain satisfaction for
the wrong and injury shamefully done to her. It came to pass, then,
that having sallied forth one morning to practise and exercise himself
in what he would have to do in the encounter he expected to find
himself engaged in the next day, as he was putting Rocinante through
his paces or pressing him to the charge, he brought his feet so close
to a pit that but for reining him in tightly it would have been
impossible for him to avoid falling into it. He pulled him up, however,
without a fall, and coming a little closer examined the hole without
dismounting; but as he was looking at it he heard loud cries proceeding
from it, and by listening attentively was able to make out that he who
uttered them was saying, “Ho, above there! is there any Christian that
hears me, or any charitable gentleman that will take pity on a sinner
buried alive, on an unfortunate disgoverned governor?”

It struck Don Quixote that it was the voice of Sancho Panza he heard,
whereat he was taken aback and amazed, and raising his own voice as
much as he could, he cried out, “Who is below there? Who is that
complaining?”

“Who should be here, or who should complain,” was the answer, “but the
forlorn Sancho Panza, for his sins and for his ill-luck governor of the
island of Barataria, squire that was to the famous knight Don Quixote
of La Mancha?”

When Don Quixote heard this his amazement was redoubled and his
perturbation grew greater than ever, for it suggested itself to his
mind that Sancho must be dead, and that his soul was in torment down
there; and carried away by this idea he exclaimed, “I conjure thee by
everything that as a Catholic Christian I can conjure thee by, tell me
who thou art; and if thou art a soul in torment, tell me what thou
wouldst have me do for thee; for as my profession is to give aid and
succour to those that need it in this world, it will also extend to
aiding and succouring the distressed of the other, who cannot help
themselves.”

“In that case,” answered the voice, “your worship who speaks to me must
be my master Don Quixote of La Mancha; nay, from the tone of the voice
it is plain it can be nobody else.”

“Don Quixote I am,” replied Don Quixote, “he whose profession it is to
aid and succour the living and the dead in their necessities; wherefore
tell me who thou art, for thou art keeping me in suspense; because, if
thou art my squire Sancho Panza, and art dead, since the devils have
not carried thee off, and thou art by God’s mercy in purgatory, our
holy mother the Roman Catholic Church has intercessory means sufficient
to release thee from the pains thou art in; and I for my part will
plead with her to that end, so far as my substance will go; without
further delay, therefore, declare thyself, and tell me who thou art.”

“By all that’s good,” was the answer, “and by the birth of whomsoever
your worship chooses, I swear, Señor Don Quixote of La Mancha, that I
am your squire Sancho Panza, and that I have never died all my life;
but that, having given up my government for reasons that would require
more time to explain, I fell last night into this pit where I am now,
and Dapple is witness and won’t let me lie, for more by token he is
here with me.”

Nor was this all; one would have fancied the ass understood what Sancho
said, because that moment he began to bray so loudly