e can make it.

My purpose here is not to dogmatise on the rules of translation, but to
indicate those I have followed, or at least tried to the best of my
ability to follow, in the present instance. One which, it seems to me,
cannot be too rigidly followed in translating “Don Quixote,” is to
avoid everything that savours of affectation. The book itself is,
indeed, in one sense a protest against it, and no man abhorred it more
than Cervantes. For this reason, I think, any temptation to use
antiquated or obsolete language should be resisted. It is after all an
affectation, and one for which there is no warrant or excuse. Spanish
has probably undergone less change since the seventeenth century than
any language in Europe, and by far the greater and certainly the best
part of “Don Quixote” differs but little in language from the
colloquial Spanish of the present day. Except in the tales and Don
Quixote’s speeches, the translator who uses the simplest and plainest
everyday language will almost always be the one who approaches nearest
to the original.

Seeing that the story of “Don Quixote” and all its characters and
incidents have now been for more than two centuries and a half familiar
as household words in English mouths, it seems to me that the old
familiar names and phrases should not be changed without good reason.
Of course a translator who holds that “Don Quixote” should receive the
treatment a great classic deserves, will feel himself bound by the
injunction laid upon the Morisco in Chap. IX not to omit or add
anything.




CERVANTES


Four generations had laughed over “Don Quixote” before it occurred to
anyone to ask, who and what manner of man was this Miguel de Cervantes
Saavedra whose name is on the title-page; and it was too late for a
satisfactory answer to the question when it was proposed to add a life
of the author to the London edition published at Lord Carteret’s
instance in 1738. All traces of the personality of Cervantes had by
that time disappeared. Any floating traditions that may once have
existed, transmitted from men who had known him, had long since died
out, and of other record there was none; for the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries were incurious as to “the men of the time,” a
reproach against which the nineteenth has, at any rate, secured itself,
if it has produced no Shakespeare or Cervantes. All that Mayans y
Siscar, to whom the task was entrusted, or any of those who followed
him, Rios, Pellicer, or Navarrete, could do was to eke out the few
allusions Cervantes makes to himself in his various prefaces with such
pieces of documentary evidence bearing upon his life as they could
find.

This, however, has been done by the last-named biographer to such good
purpose that he has superseded all predecessors. Thoroughness is the
chief characteristic of Navarrete’s work. Besides sifting, testing, and
methodising with rare patience and judgment what had been previously
brought to light, he left, as the saying is, no stone unturned under
which anything to illustrate his subject might possibly be found.
Navarrete has done all that industry and acumen could do, and it is no
fault of his if he has not given us what we want. What Hallam says of
Shakespeare may be applied to the almost parallel case of Cervantes:
“It is not the register of his baptism, or the draft of his will, or
the orthography of his name that we seek; no letter of his writing, no
record of his conversation, no character of him drawn ... by a
contemporary has been produced.”

It is only natural, therefore, that the biographers of Cervantes,
forced to make brick without straw, should have recourse largely to
conjecture, and that conjecture should in some instances come by
degrees to take the place of established fact. All that I propose to do
here is to separate what is matter of fact from what is matter of
conjecture, and leave it to the reader’s judgment to decide wheth