w legislator, a modern
Lycurgus, or a brand-new Solon; and so completely did they remodel the
State, that they seemed to have thrust it into a furnace and taken out
something quite different from what they had put in; and on all the
subjects they dealt with, Don Quixote spoke with such good sense that
the pair of examiners were fully convinced that he was quite recovered
and in his full senses.

The niece and housekeeper were present at the conversation and could
not find words enough to express their thanks to God at seeing their
master so clear in his mind; the curate, however, changing his original
plan, which was to avoid touching upon matters of chivalry, resolved to
test Don Quixote’s recovery thoroughly, and see whether it were genuine
or not; and so, from one subject to another, he came at last to talk of
the news that had come from the capital, and, among other things, he
said it was considered certain that the Turk was coming down with a
powerful fleet, and that no one knew what his purpose was, or when the
great storm would burst; and that all Christendom was in apprehension
of this, which almost every year calls us to arms, and that his Majesty
had made provision for the security of the coasts of Naples and Sicily
and the island of Malta.

To this Don Quixote replied, “His Majesty has acted like a prudent
warrior in providing for the safety of his realms in time, so that the
enemy may not find him unprepared; but if my advice were taken I would
recommend him to adopt a measure which at present, no doubt, his
Majesty is very far from thinking of.”

The moment the curate heard this he said to himself, “God keep thee in
his hand, poor Don Quixote, for it seems to me thou art precipitating
thyself from the height of thy madness into the profound abyss of thy
simplicity.”

But the barber, who had the same suspicion as the curate, asked Don
Quixote what would be his advice as to the measures that he said ought
to be adopted; for perhaps it might prove to be one that would have to
be added to the list of the many impertinent suggestions that people
were in the habit of offering to princes.

“Mine, master shaver,” said Don Quixote, “will not be impertinent, but,
on the contrary, pertinent.”

“I don’t mean that,” said the barber, “but that experience has shown
that all or most of the expedients which are proposed to his Majesty
are either impossible, or absurd, or injurious to the King and to the
kingdom.”

“Mine, however,” replied Don Quixote, “is neither impossible nor
absurd, but the easiest, the most reasonable, the readiest and most
expeditious that could suggest itself to any projector’s mind.”

“You take a long time to tell it, Señor Don Quixote,” said the curate.

“I don’t choose to tell it here, now,” said Don Quixote, “and have it
reach the ears of the lords of the council to-morrow morning, and some
other carry off the thanks and rewards of my trouble.”

“For my part,” said the barber, “I give my word here and before God
that I will not repeat what your worship says, to King, Rook or earthly
man—an oath I learned from the ballad of the curate, who, in the
prelude, told the king of the thief who had robbed him of the hundred
gold crowns and his pacing mule.”

“I am not versed in stories,” said Don Quixote; “but I know the oath is
a good one, because I know the barber to be an honest fellow.”

“Even if he were not,” said the curate, “I will go bail and answer for
him that in this matter he will be as silent as a dummy, under pain of
paying any penalty that may be pronounced.”

“And who will be security for you, señor curate?” said Don Quixote.

“My profession,” replied the curate, “which is to keep secrets.”

“Ods body!” said Don Quixote at this, “what more has his Majesty to do
but to command, by public proclamation, all the knights-errant that are
scattered over Spain to assemble on a fixed day in the capital, for
even if no more than ha