enchanter, and I am not so well off that I am to
be envied; to be sure, I am rather sly, and I have a certain spice of
the rogue in me; but all is covered by the great cloak of my
simplicity, always natural and never acted; and if I had no other merit
save that I believe, as I always do, firmly and truly in God, and all
the holy Roman Catholic Church holds and believes, and that I am a
mortal enemy of the Jews, the historians ought to have mercy on me and
treat me well in their writings. But let them say what they like; naked
was I born, naked I find myself, I neither lose nor gain; nay, while I
see myself put into a book and passed on from hand to hand over the
world, I don’t care a fig, let them say what they like of me.”

“That, Sancho,” returned Don Quixote, “reminds me of what happened to a
famous poet of our own day, who, having written a bitter satire against
all the courtesan ladies, did not insert or name in it a certain lady
of whom it was questionable whether she was one or not. She, seeing she
was not in the list of the poet, asked him what he had seen in her that
he did not include her in the number of the others, telling him he must
add to his satire and put her in the new part, or else look out for the
consequences. The poet did as she bade him, and left her without a
shred of reputation, and she was satisfied by getting fame though it
was infamy. In keeping with this is what they relate of that shepherd
who set fire to the famous temple of Diana, by repute one of the seven
wonders of the world, and burned it with the sole object of making his
name live in after ages; and, though it was forbidden to name him, or
mention his name by word of mouth or in writing, lest the object of his
ambition should be attained, nevertheless it became known that he was
called Erostratus. And something of the same sort is what happened in
the case of the great emperor Charles V. and a gentleman in Rome. The
emperor was anxious to see that famous temple of the Rotunda, called in
ancient times the temple ‘of all the gods,’ but now-a-days, by a better
nomenclature, ‘of all the saints,’ which is the best preserved building
of all those of pagan construction in Rome, and the one which best
sustains the reputation of mighty works and magnificence of its
founders. It is in the form of a half orange, of enormous dimensions,
and well lighted, though no light penetrates it save that which is
admitted by a window, or rather round skylight, at the top; and it was
from this that the emperor examined the building. A Roman gentleman
stood by his side and explained to him the skilful construction and
ingenuity of the vast fabric and its wonderful architecture, and when
they had left the skylight he said to the emperor, ‘A thousand times,
your Sacred Majesty, the impulse came upon me to seize your Majesty in
my arms and fling myself down from yonder skylight, so as to leave
behind me in the world a name that would last for ever.’ ‘I am thankful
to you for not carrying such an evil thought into effect,’ said the
emperor, ‘and I shall give you no opportunity in future of again
putting your loyalty to the test; and I therefore forbid you ever to
speak to me or to be where I am; and he followed up these words by
bestowing a liberal bounty upon him. My meaning is, Sancho, that the
desire of acquiring fame is a very powerful motive. What, thinkest
thou, was it that flung Horatius in full armour down from the bridge
into the depths of the Tiber? What burned the hand and arm of Mutius?
What impelled Curtius to plunge into the deep burning gulf that opened
in the midst of Rome? What, in opposition to all the omens that
declared against him, made Julius Cæsar cross the Rubicon? And to come
to more modern examples, what scuttled the ships, and left stranded and
cut off the gallant Spaniards under the command of the most courteous
Cortés in the New World? All these and a variety of other great
exploits