x pin thrusts in the back and arms;
for upon this ceremony depends the restoration of Altisidora.”

On hearing this Sancho broke silence and cried out, “By all that’s
good, I’ll as soon let my face be smacked or handled as turn Moor. Body
o’ me! What has handling my face got to do with the resurrection of
this damsel? ‘The old woman took kindly to the blits;’ they enchant
Dulcinea, and whip me in order to disenchant her; Altisidora dies of
ailments God was pleased to send her, and to bring her to life again
they must give me four-and-twenty smacks, and prick holes in my body
with pins, and raise weals on my arms with pinches! Try those jokes on
a brother-in-law; ‘I’m an old dog, and “tus, tus” is no use with me.’”

“Thou shalt die,” said Rhadamanthus in a loud voice; “relent, thou
tiger; humble thyself, proud Nimrod; suffer and he silent, for no
impossibilities are asked of thee; it is not for thee to inquire into
the difficulties in this matter; smacked thou must be, pricked thou
shalt see thyself, and with pinches thou must be made to howl. Ho, I
say, officials, obey my orders; or by the word of an honest man, ye
shall see what ye were born for.”

At this some six duennas, advancing across the court, made their
appearance in procession, one after the other, four of them with
spectacles, and all with their right hands uplifted, showing four
fingers of wrist to make their hands look longer, as is the fashion
now-a-days. No sooner had Sancho caught sight of them than, bellowing
like a bull, he exclaimed, “I might let myself be handled by all the
world; but allow duennas to touch me—not a bit of it! Scratch my face,
as my master was served in this very castle; run me through the body
with burnished daggers; pinch my arms with red-hot pincers; I’ll bear
all in patience to serve these gentlefolk; but I won’t let duennas
touch me, though the devil should carry me off!”

Here Don Quixote, too, broke silence, saying to Sancho, “Have patience,
my son, and gratify these noble persons, and give all thanks to heaven
that it has infused such virtue into thy person, that by its sufferings
thou canst disenchant the enchanted and restore to life the dead.”

The duennas were now close to Sancho, and he, having become more
tractable and reasonable, settling himself well in his chair presented
his face and beard to the first, who delivered him a smack very stoutly
laid on, and then made him a low curtsey.

“Less politeness and less paint, señora duenna,” said Sancho; “by God
your hands smell of vinegar-wash.”

In line, all the duennas smacked him and several others of the
household pinched him; but what he could not stand was being pricked by
the pins; and so, apparently out of patience, he started up out of his
chair, and seizing a lighted torch that stood near him fell upon the
duennas and the whole set of his tormentors, exclaiming, “Begone, ye
ministers of hell; I’m not made of brass not to feel such
out-of-the-way tortures.”

At this instant Altisidora, who probably was tired of having been so
long lying on her back, turned on her side; seeing which the bystanders
cried out almost with one voice, “Altisidora is alive! Altisidora
lives!”

Rhadamanthus bade Sancho put away his wrath, as the object they had in
view was now attained. When Don Quixote saw Altisidora move, he went on
his knees to Sancho saying to him, “Now is the time, son of my bowels,
not to call thee my squire, for thee to give thyself some of those
lashes thou art bound to lay on for the disenchantment of Dulcinea.
Now, I say, is the time when the virtue that is in thee is ripe, and
endowed with efficacy to work the good that is looked for from thee.”

To which Sancho made answer, “That’s trick upon trick, I think, and not
honey upon pancakes; a nice thing it would be for a whipping to come
now, on the top of pinches, smacks, and pin-proddings! You had better
take a big stone and tie it round my neck, and 