s squire
gave him; “I had rather they despoiled me of an arm, so it were not the
sword-arm; for I tell thee, Sancho, a mouth without teeth is like a
mill without a millstone, and a tooth is much more to be prized than a
diamond; but we who profess the austere order of chivalry are liable to
all this. Mount, friend, and lead the way, and I will follow thee at
whatever pace thou wilt.”

Sancho did as he bade him, and proceeded in the direction in which he
thought he might find refuge without quitting the high road, which was
there very much frequented. As they went along, then, at a slow
pace—for the pain in Don Quixote’s jaws kept him uneasy and
ill-disposed for speed—Sancho thought it well to amuse and divert him
by talk of some kind, and among the things he said to him was that
which will be told in the following chapter.



c18e.jpg (44K)



CHAPTER XIX.
OF THE SHREWD DISCOURSE WHICH SANCHO HELD WITH HIS MASTER, AND OF THE
ADVENTURE THAT BEFELL HIM WITH A DEAD BODY, TOGETHER WITH OTHER NOTABLE
OCCURRENCES

“It seems to me, señor, that all these mishaps that have befallen us of
late have been without any doubt a punishment for the offence committed
by your worship against the order of chivalry in not keeping the oath
you made not to eat bread off a tablecloth or embrace the queen, and
all the rest of it that your worship swore to observe until you had
taken that helmet of Malandrino’s, or whatever the Moor is called, for
I do not very well remember.”

“Thou art very right, Sancho,” said Don Quixote, “but to tell the
truth, it had escaped my memory; and likewise thou mayest rely upon it
that the affair of the blanket happened to thee because of thy fault in
not reminding me of it in time; but I will make amends, for there are
ways of compounding for everything in the order of chivalry.”

“Why! have I taken an oath of some sort, then?” said Sancho.

“It makes no matter that thou hast not taken an oath,” said Don
Quixote; “suffice it that I see thou art not quite clear of complicity;
and whether or no, it will not be ill done to provide ourselves with a
remedy.”

“In that case,” said Sancho, “mind that your worship does not forget
this as you did the oath; perhaps the phantoms may take it into their
heads to amuse themselves once more with me; or even with your worship
if they see you so obstinate.”

While engaged in this and other talk, night overtook them on the road
before they had reached or discovered any place of shelter; and what
made it still worse was that they were dying of hunger, for with the
loss of the alforjas they had lost their entire larder and
commissariat; and to complete the misfortune they met with an adventure
which without any invention had really the appearance of one. It so
happened that the night closed in somewhat darkly, but for all that
they pushed on, Sancho feeling sure that as the road was the king’s
highway they might reasonably expect to find some inn within a league
or two. Going along, then, in this way, the night dark, the squire
hungry, the master sharp-set, they saw coming towards them on the road
they were travelling a great number of lights which looked exactly like
stars in motion. Sancho was taken aback at the sight of them, nor did
Don Quixote altogether relish them: the one pulled up his ass by the
halter, the other his hack by the bridle, and they stood still,
watching anxiously to see what all this would turn out to be, and found
that the lights were approaching them, and the nearer they came the
greater they seemed, at which spectacle Sancho began to shake like a
man dosed with mercury, and Don Quixote’s hair stood on end; he,
however, plucking up spirit a little, said:

“This, no doubt, Sancho, will be a most mighty and perilous adventure,
in which it will be needful for me to put forth all my valour and
resolution.”

“Unlucky me!” answered Sancho; “if this adventure happens to be one of
phantoms, as I