d, to whom when he came up to see what he wanted he said, “Señor,
is not this battle to decide whether I marry or do not marry that
lady?” “Just so,” was the answer. “Well then,” said the lacquey, “I
feel qualms of conscience, and I should lay a heavy burden upon it if I
were to proceed any further with the combat; I therefore declare that I
yield myself vanquished, and that I am willing to marry the lady at
once.”

The marshal of the field was lost in astonishment at the words of
Tosilos; and as he was one of those who were privy to the arrangement
of the affair he knew not what to say in reply. Don Quixote pulled up
in mid career when he saw that his enemy was not coming on to the
attack. The duke could not make out the reason why the battle did not
go on; but the marshal of the field hastened to him to let him know
what Tosilos said, and he was amazed and extremely angry at it. In the
meantime Tosilos advanced to where Doña Rodriguez sat and said in a
loud voice, “Señora, I am willing to marry your daughter, and I have no
wish to obtain by strife and fighting what I can obtain in peace and
without any risk to my life.”

The valiant Don Quixote heard him, and said, “As that is the case I am
released and absolved from my promise; let them marry by all means, and
as ‘God our Lord has given her, may Saint Peter add his blessing.’”

The duke had now descended to the courtyard of the castle, and going up
to Tosilos he said to him, “Is it true, sir knight, that you yield
yourself vanquished, and that moved by scruples of conscience you wish
to marry this damsel?”

“It is, señor,” replied Tosilos.

“And he does well,” said Sancho, “for what thou hast to give to the
mouse, give to the cat, and it will save thee all trouble.”

Tosilos meanwhile was trying to unlace his helmet, and he begged them
to come to his help at once, as his power of breathing was failing him,
and he could not remain so long shut up in that confined space. They
removed it in all haste, and his lacquey features were revealed to
public gaze. At this sight Doña Rodriguez and her daughter raised a
mighty outcry, exclaiming, “This is a trick! This is a trick! They have
put Tosilos, my lord the duke’s lacquey, upon us in place of the real
husband. The justice of God and the king against such trickery, not to
say roguery!”

“Do not distress yourselves, ladies,” said Don Quixote; “for this is no
trickery or roguery; or if it is, it is not the duke who is at the
bottom of it, but those wicked enchanters who persecute me, and who,
jealous of my reaping the glory of this victory, have turned your
husband’s features into those of this person, who you say is a lacquey
of the duke’s; take my advice, and notwithstanding the malice of my
enemies marry him, for beyond a doubt he is the one you wish for a
husband.”

When the duke heard this all his anger was near vanishing in a fit of
laughter, and he said, “The things that happen to Señor Don Quixote are
so extraordinary that I am ready to believe this lacquey of mine is not
one; but let us adopt this plan and device; let us put off the marriage
for, say, a fortnight, and let us keep this person about whom we are
uncertain in close confinement, and perhaps in the course of that time
he may return to his original shape; for the spite which the enchanters
entertain against Señor Don Quixote cannot last so long, especially as
it is of so little advantage to them to practise these deceptions and
transformations.”

“Oh, señor,” said Sancho, “those scoundrels are well used to changing
whatever concerns my master from one thing into another. A knight that
he overcame some time back, called the Knight of the Mirrors, they
turned into the shape of the bachelor Samson Carrasco of our town and a
great friend of ours; and my lady Dulcinea del Toboso they have turned
into a common country wench; so I suspect this lacquey will have to
live and die a lacquey all the days of