 his life.”

Here the Rodriguez’s daughter exclaimed, “Let him be who he may, this
man that claims me for a wife; I am thankful to him for the same, for I
had rather be the lawful wife of a lacquey than the cheated mistress of
a gentleman; though he who played me false is nothing of the kind.”

To be brief, all the talk and all that had happened ended in Tosilos
being shut up until it was seen how his transformation turned out. All
hailed Don Quixote as victor, but the greater number were vexed and
disappointed at finding that the combatants they had been so anxiously
waiting for had not battered one another to pieces, just as the boys
are disappointed when the man they are waiting to see hanged does not
come out, because the prosecution or the court has pardoned him. The
people dispersed, the duke and Don Quixote returned to the castle, they
locked up Tosilos, Doña Rodriguez and her daughter remained perfectly
contented when they saw that any way the affair must end in marriage,
and Tosilos wanted nothing else.



p56e.jpg (46K)



CHAPTER LVII.
WHICH TREATS OF HOW DON QUIXOTE TOOK LEAVE OF THE DUKE, AND OF WHAT
FOLLOWED WITH THE WITTY AND IMPUDENT ALTISIDORA, ONE OF THE DUCHESS’S
DAMSELS




p57a.jpg (119K)

Full Size



Don Quixote now felt it right to quit a life of such idleness as he was
leading in the castle; for he fancied that he was making himself sorely
missed by suffering himself to remain shut up and inactive amid the
countless luxuries and enjoyments his hosts lavished upon him as a
knight, and he felt too that he would have to render a strict account
to heaven of that indolence and seclusion; and so one day he asked the
duke and duchess to grant him permission to take his departure. They
gave it, showing at the same time that they were very sorry he was
leaving them.



p57b.jpg (370K)

Full Size



The duchess gave his wife’s letters to Sancho Panza, who shed tears
over them, saying, “Who would have thought that such grand hopes as the
news of my government bred in my wife Teresa Panza’s breast would end
in my going back now to the vagabond adventures of my master Don
Quixote of La Mancha? Still I’m glad to see my Teresa behaved as she
ought in sending the acorns, for if she had not sent them I’d have been
sorry, and she’d have shown herself ungrateful. It is a comfort to me
that they can’t call that present a bribe; for I had got the government
already when she sent them, and it’s but reasonable that those who have
had a good turn done them should show their gratitude, if it’s only
with a trifle. After all I went into the government naked, and I come
out of it naked; so I can say with a safe conscience—and that’s no
small matter—‘naked I was born, naked I find myself, I neither lose nor
gain.’”

Thus did Sancho soliloquise on the day of their departure, as Don
Quixote, who had the night before taken leave of the duke and duchess,
coming out made his appearance at an early hour in full armour in the
courtyard of the castle. The whole household of the castle were
watching him from the corridors, and the duke and duchess, too, came
out to see him. Sancho was mounted on his Dapple, with his alforjas,
valise, and proven supremely happy because the duke’s majordomo, the
same that had acted the part of the Trifaldi, had given him a little
purse with two hundred gold crowns to meet the necessary expenses of
the road, but of this Don Quixote knew nothing as yet. While all were,
as has been said, observing him, suddenly from among the duennas and
handmaidens the impudent and witty Altisidora lifted up her voice and
said in pathetic tones:

Give ear, cruel knight;
Draw rein; where’s the need
Of spurring the flanks
Of that ill-broken steed?
From what art thou flying?
No dragon I am,
Not even a sheep,
But a tender young lamb.
Thou hast jilted a maiden
As fair to behold
As nymph of Diana
Or Venus of old.
Bireno, Æneas, what wor