e with us all.” Long life to the great Conde de Lemos, whose
Christian charity and well-known generosity support me against all the
strokes of my curst fortune; and long life to the supreme benevolence
of His Eminence of Toledo, Don Bernardo de Sandoval y Rojas; and what
matter if there be no printing-presses in the world, or if they print
more books against me than there are letters in the verses of Mingo
Revulgo! These two princes, unsought by any adulation or flattery of
mine, of their own goodness alone, have taken it upon them to show me
kindness and protect me, and in this I consider myself happier and
richer than if Fortune had raised me to her greatest height in the
ordinary way. The poor man may retain honour, but not the vicious;
poverty may cast a cloud over nobility, but cannot hide it altogether;
and as virtue of itself sheds a certain light, even though it be
through the straits and chinks of penury, it wins the esteem of lofty
and noble spirits, and in consequence their protection. Thou needst say
no more to him, nor will I say anything more to thee, save to tell thee
to bear in mind that this Second Part of “Don Quixote” which I offer
thee is cut by the same craftsman and from the same cloth as the First,
and that in it I present thee Don Quixote continued, and at length dead
and buried, so that no one may dare to bring forward any further
evidence against him, for that already produced is sufficient; and
suffice it, too, that some reputable person should have given an
account of all these shrewd lunacies of his without going into the
matter again; for abundance, even of good things, prevents them from
being valued; and scarcity, even in the case of what is bad, confers a
certain value. I was forgetting to tell thee that thou mayest expect
the “Persiles,” which I am now finishing, and also the Second Part of
“Galatea.”



part2e.jpg (37K)



CHAPTER I.
OF THE INTERVIEW THE CURATE AND THE BARBER HAD WITH DON QUIXOTE ABOUT
HIS MALADY




p01a.jpg (156K)

Full Size



Cide Hamete Benengeli, in the Second Part of this history, and third
sally of Don Quixote, says that the curate and the barber remained
nearly a month without seeing him, lest they should recall or bring
back to his recollection what had taken place. They did not, however,
omit to visit his niece and housekeeper, and charge them to be careful
to treat him with attention, and give him comforting things to eat, and
such as were good for the heart and the brain, whence, it was plain to
see, all his misfortune proceeded. The niece and housekeeper replied
that they did so, and meant to do so with all possible care and
assiduity, for they could perceive that their master was now and then
beginning to show signs of being in his right mind. This gave great
satisfaction to the curate and the barber, for they concluded they had
taken the right course in carrying him off enchanted on the ox-cart, as
has been described in the First Part of this great as well as accurate
history, in the last chapter thereof. So they resolved to pay him a
visit and test the improvement in his condition, although they thought
it almost impossible that there could be any; and they agreed not to
touch upon any point connected with knight-errantry so as not to run
the risk of reopening wounds which were still so tender.

They came to see him consequently, and found him sitting up in bed in a
green baize waistcoat and a red Toledo cap, and so withered and dried
up that he looked as if he had been turned into a mummy. They were very
cordially received by him; they asked him after his health, and he
talked to them about himself very naturally and in very well-chosen
language. In the course of their conversation they fell to discussing
what they call State-craft and systems of government, correcting this
abuse and condemning that, reforming one practice and abolishing
another, each of the three setting up for a ne