yes shall swell the waters
of yon little brook, and my deep and endless sighs shall stir
unceasingly the leaves of these mountain trees, in testimony and token
of the pain my persecuted heart is suffering. Oh, ye rural deities,
whoever ye be that haunt this lone spot, give ear to the complaint of a
wretched lover whom long absence and brooding jealousy have driven to
bewail his fate among these wilds and complain of the hard heart of
that fair and ungrateful one, the end and limit of all human beauty!
Oh, ye wood nymphs and dryads, that dwell in the thickets of the
forest, so may the nimble wanton satyrs by whom ye are vainly wooed
never disturb your sweet repose, help me to lament my hard fate or at
least weary not at listening to it! Oh, Dulcinea del Toboso, day of my
night, glory of my pain, guide of my path, star of my fortune, so may
Heaven grant thee in full all thou seekest of it, bethink thee of the
place and condition to which absence from thee has brought me, and make
that return in kindness that is due to my fidelity! Oh, lonely trees,
that from this day forward shall bear me company in my solitude, give
me some sign by the gentle movement of your boughs that my presence is
not distasteful to you! Oh, thou, my squire, pleasant companion in my
prosperous and adverse fortunes, fix well in thy memory what thou shalt
see me do here, so that thou mayest relate and report it to the sole
cause of all,” and so saying he dismounted from Rocinante, and in an
instant relieved him of saddle and bridle, and giving him a slap on the
croup, said, “He gives thee freedom who is bereft of it himself, oh
steed as excellent in deed as thou art unfortunate in thy lot; begone
where thou wilt, for thou bearest written on thy forehead that neither
Astolfo’s hippogriff, nor the famed Frontino that cost Bradamante so
dear, could equal thee in speed.”

Seeing this Sancho said, “Good luck to him who has saved us the trouble
of stripping the pack-saddle off Dapple! By my faith he would not have
gone without a slap on the croup and something said in his praise;
though if he were here I would not let anyone strip him, for there
would be no occasion, as he had nothing of the lover or victim of
despair about him, inasmuch as his master, which I was while it was
God’s pleasure, was nothing of the sort; and indeed, Sir Knight of the
Rueful Countenance, if my departure and your worship’s madness are to
come off in earnest, it will be as well to saddle Rocinante again in
order that he may supply the want of Dapple, because it will save me
time in going and returning: for if I go on foot I don’t know when I
shall get there or when I shall get back, as I am, in truth, a bad
walker.”

“I declare, Sancho,” returned Don Quixote, “it shall be as thou wilt,
for thy plan does not seem to me a bad one, and three days hence thou
wilt depart, for I wish thee to observe in the meantime what I do and
say for her sake, that thou mayest be able to tell it.”

“But what more have I to see besides what I have seen?” said Sancho.

“Much thou knowest about it!” said Don Quixote. “I have now got to tear
up my garments, to scatter about my armour, knock my head against these
rocks, and more of the same sort of thing, which thou must witness.”

“For the love of God,” said Sancho, “be careful, your worship, how you
give yourself those knocks on the head, for you may come across such a
rock, and in such a way, that the very first may put an end to the
whole contrivance of this penance; and I should think, if indeed knocks
on the head seem necessary to you, and this business cannot be done
without them, you might be content—as the whole thing is feigned, and
counterfeit, and in joke—you might be content, I say, with giving them
to yourself in the water, or against something soft, like cotton; and
leave it all to me; for I’ll tell my lady that your worship knocked
your head against a point of rock harder than a diamo