y, when there is a better opportunity and more time, we
will come back for you.’ So they stripped the licentiate, and he was
left where he was; and that’s the end of the story.”

“So that’s the story, master barber,” said Don Quixote, “which came in
so pat to the purpose that you could not help telling it? Master
shaver, master shaver! how blind is he who cannot see through a sieve.
Is it possible that you do not know that comparisons of wit with wit,
valour with valour, beauty with beauty, birth with birth, are always
odious and unwelcome? I, master barber, am not Neptune, the god of the
waters, nor do I try to make anyone take me for an astute man, for I am
not one. My only endeavour is to convince the world of the mistake it
makes in not reviving in itself the happy time when the order of
knight-errantry was in the field. But our depraved age does not deserve
to enjoy such a blessing as those ages enjoyed when knights-errant took
upon their shoulders the defence of kingdoms, the protection of
damsels, the succour of orphans and minors, the chastisement of the
proud, and the recompense of the humble. With the knights of these
days, for the most part, it is the damask, brocade, and rich stuffs
they wear, that rustle as they go, not the chain mail of their armour;
no knight now-a-days sleeps in the open field exposed to the inclemency
of heaven, and in full panoply from head to foot; no one now takes a
nap, as they call it, without drawing his feet out of the stirrups, and
leaning upon his lance, as the knights-errant used to do; no one now,
issuing from the wood, penetrates yonder mountains, and then treads the
barren, lonely shore of the sea—mostly a tempestuous and stormy one—and
finding on the beach a little bark without oars, sail, mast, or
tackling of any kind, in the intrepidity of his heart flings himself
into it and commits himself to the wrathful billows of the deep sea,
that one moment lift him up to heaven and the next plunge him into the
depths; and opposing his breast to the irresistible gale, finds
himself, when he least expects it, three thousand leagues and more away
from the place where he embarked; and leaping ashore in a remote and
unknown land has adventures that deserve to be written, not on
parchment, but on brass. But now sloth triumphs over energy, indolence
over exertion, vice over virtue, arrogance over courage, and theory
over practice in arms, which flourished and shone only in the golden
ages and in knights-errant. For tell me, who was more virtuous and more
valiant than the famous Amadis of Gaul? Who more discreet than Palmerin
of England? Who more gracious and easy than Tirante el Blanco? Who more
courtly than Lisuarte of Greece? Who more slashed or slashing than Don
Belianis? Who more intrepid than Perion of Gaul? Who more ready to face
danger than Felixmarte of Hircania? Who more sincere than Esplandian?
Who more impetuous than Don Cirongilio of Thrace? Who more bold than
Rodamonte? Who more prudent than King Sobrino? Who more daring than
Reinaldos? Who more invincible than Roland? and who more gallant and
courteous than Ruggiero, from whom the dukes of Ferrara of the present
day are descended, according to Turpin in his ‘Cosmography.’ All these
knights, and many more that I could name, señor curate, were
knights-errant, the light and glory of chivalry. These, or such as
these, I would have to carry out my plan, and in that case his Majesty
would find himself well served and would save great expense, and the
Turk would be left tearing his beard. And so I will stay where I am, as
the chaplain does not take me away; and if Jupiter, as the barber has
told us, will not send rain, here am I, and I will rain when I please.
I say this that Master Basin may know that I understand him.”

“Indeed, Señor Don Quixote,” said the barber, “I did not mean it in
that way, and, so help me God, my intention was good, and your worship
ought not to be vexe