nacing tone,
exclaimed, “Carter, or coachman, or devil, or whatever thou art, tell
me at once who thou art, whither thou art going, and who these folk are
thou carriest in thy wagon, which looks more like Charon’s boat than an
ordinary cart.”

To which the devil, stopping the cart, answered quietly, “Señor, we are
players of Angulo el Malo’s company; we have been acting the play of
‘The Cortés of Death’ this morning, which is the octave of Corpus
Christi, in a village behind that hill, and we have to act it this
afternoon in that village which you can see from this; and as it is so
near, and to save the trouble of undressing and dressing again, we go
in the costumes in which we perform. That lad there appears as Death,
that other as an angel, that woman, the manager’s wife, plays the
queen, this one the soldier, that the emperor, and I the devil; and I
am one of the principal characters of the play, for in this company I
take the leading parts. If you want to know anything more about us, ask
me and I will answer with the utmost exactitude, for as I am a devil I
am up to everything.”

“By the faith of a knight-errant,” replied Don Quixote, “when I saw
this cart I fancied some great adventure was presenting itself to me;
but I declare one must touch with the hand what appears to the eye, if
illusions are to be avoided. God speed you, good people; keep your
festival, and remember, if you demand of me ought wherein I can render
you a service, I will do it gladly and willingly, for from a child I
was fond of the play, and in my youth a keen lover of the actor’s art.”

While they were talking, fate so willed it that one of the company in a
mummers’ dress with a great number of bells, and armed with three blown
ox-bladders at the end of a stick, joined them, and this merry-andrew
approaching Don Quixote, began flourishing his stick and banging the
ground with the bladders and cutting capers with great jingling of the
bells, which untoward apparition so startled Rocinante that, in spite
of Don Quixote’s efforts to hold him in, taking the bit between his
teeth he set off across the plain with greater speed than the bones of
his anatomy ever gave any promise of.



p11b.jpg (327K)

Full Size



Sancho, who thought his master was in danger of being thrown, jumped
off Dapple, and ran in all haste to help him; but by the time he
reached him he was already on the ground, and beside him was Rocinante,
who had come down with his master, the usual end and upshot of
Rocinante’s vivacity and high spirits. But the moment Sancho quitted
his beast to go and help Don Quixote, the dancing devil with the
bladders jumped up on Dapple, and beating him with them, more by the
fright and the noise than by the pain of the blows, made him fly across
the fields towards the village where they were going to hold their
festival. Sancho witnessed Dapple’s career and his master’s fall, and
did not know which of the two cases of need he should attend to first;
but in the end, like a good squire and good servant, he let his love
for his master prevail over his affection for his ass; though every
time he saw the bladders rise in the air and come down on the hind
quarters of his Dapple he felt the pains and terrors of death, and he
would have rather had the blows fall on the apples of his own eyes than
on the least hair of his ass’s tail. In this trouble and perplexity he
came to where Don Quixote lay in a far sorrier plight than he liked,
and having helped him to mount Rocinante, he said to him, “Señor, the
devil has carried off my Dapple.”

“What devil?” asked Don Quixote.

“The one with the bladders,” said Sancho.

“Then I will recover him,” said Don Quixote, “even if he be shut up
with him in the deepest and darkest dungeons of hell. Follow me,
Sancho, for the cart goes slowly, and with the mules of it I will make
good the loss of Dapple.”

“You need not take the trouble, señor,” said Sanc