ecked by jackdaws, a mule saddled and bridled, all which still
further strengthened their suspicion that he who had fled was the owner
of the mule and the saddle-pad.



c23h.jpg (381K)

Full Size




As they stood looking at it they heard a whistle like that of a
shepherd watching his flock, and suddenly on their left there appeared
a great number of goats and behind them on the summit of the mountain
the goatherd in charge of them, a man advanced in years. Don Quixote
called aloud to him and begged him to come down to where they stood. He
shouted in return, asking what had brought them to that spot, seldom or
never trodden except by the feet of goats, or of the wolves and other
wild beasts that roamed around. Sancho in return bade him come down,
and they would explain all to him.

The goatherd descended, and reaching the place where Don Quixote stood,
he said, “I will wager you are looking at that hack mule that lies dead
in the hollow there, and, faith, it has been lying there now these six
months; tell me, have you come upon its master about here?”

“We have come upon nobody,” answered Don Quixote, “nor on anything
except a saddle-pad and a little valise that we found not far from
this.”

“I found it too,” said the goatherd, “but I would not lift it nor go
near it for fear of some ill-luck or being charged with theft, for the
devil is crafty, and things rise up under one’s feet to make one fall
without knowing why or wherefore.”

“That’s exactly what I say,” said Sancho; “I found it too, and I would
not go within a stone’s throw of it; there I left it, and there it lies
just as it was, for I don’t want a dog with a bell.”

“Tell me, good man,” said Don Quixote, “do you know who is the owner of
this property?”

“All I can tell you,” said the goatherd, “is that about six months ago,
more or less, there arrived at a shepherd’s hut three leagues, perhaps,
away from this, a youth of well-bred appearance and manners, mounted on
that same mule which lies dead here, and with the same saddle-pad and
valise which you say you found and did not touch. He asked us what part
of this sierra was the most rugged and retired; we told him that it was
where we now are; and so in truth it is, for if you push on half a
league farther, perhaps you will not be able to find your way out; and
I am wondering how you have managed to come here, for there is no road
or path that leads to this spot. I say, then, that on hearing our
answer the youth turned about and made for the place we pointed out to
him, leaving us all charmed with his good looks, and wondering at his
question and the haste with which we saw him depart in the direction of
the sierra; and after that we saw him no more, until some days
afterwards he crossed the path of one of our shepherds, and without
saying a word to him, came up to him and gave him several cuffs and
kicks, and then turned to the ass with our provisions and took all the
bread and cheese it carried, and having done this made off back again
into the sierra with extraordinary swiftness. When some of us goatherds
learned this we went in search of him for about two days through the
most remote portion of this sierra, at the end of which we found him
lodged in the hollow of a large thick cork tree. He came out to meet us
with great gentleness, with his dress now torn and his face so
disfigured and burned by the sun, that we hardly recognised him but
that his clothes, though torn, convinced us, from the recollection we
had of them, that he was the person we were looking for. He saluted us
courteously, and in a few well-spoken words he told us not to wonder at
seeing him going about in this guise, as it was binding upon him in
order that he might work out a penance which for his many sins had been
imposed upon him. We asked him to tell us who he was, but we were never
able to find out from him: we begged of him too, when he was in want of
food, which h