ut of me little less
than the worth of them. As I was returning to my village I fell in on
the road with this good dame, and the devil who makes a coil and a mess
out of everything, yoked us together. I paid her fairly, but she not
contented laid hold of me and never let go until she brought me here;
she says I forced her, but she lies by the oath I swear or am ready to
swear; and this is the whole truth and every particle of it.”

The governor on this asked him if he had any money in silver about him;
he said he had about twenty ducats in a leather purse in his bosom. The
governor bade him take it out and hand it to the complainant; he obeyed
trembling; the woman took it, and making a thousand salaams to all and
praying to God for the long life and health of the señor governor who
had such regard for distressed orphans and virgins, she hurried out of
court with the purse grasped in both her hands, first looking, however,
to see if the money it contained was silver.

As soon as she was gone Sancho said to the cattle dealer, whose tears
were already starting and whose eyes and heart were following his
purse, “Good fellow, go after that woman and take the purse from her,
by force even, and come back with it here;” and he did not say it to
one who was a fool or deaf, for the man was off like a flash of
lightning, and ran to do as he was bid.

All the bystanders waited anxiously to see the end of the case, and
presently both man and woman came back at even closer grips than
before, she with her petticoat up and the purse in the lap of it, and
he struggling hard to take it from her, but all to no purpose, so stout
was the woman’s defence, she all the while crying out, “Justice from
God and the world! see here, señor governor, the shamelessness and
boldness of this villain, who in the middle of the town, in the middle
of the street, wanted to take from me the purse your worship bade him
give me.”

“And did he take it?” asked the governor.

“Take it!” said the woman; “I’d let my life be taken from me sooner
than the purse. A pretty child I’d be! It’s another sort of cat they
must throw in my face, and not that poor scurvy knave. Pincers and
hammers, mallets and chisels would not get it out of my grip; no, nor
lions’ claws; the soul from out of my body first!”

“She is right,” said the man; “I own myself beaten and powerless; I
confess I haven’t the strength to take it from her;” and he let go his
hold of her.

Upon this the governor said to the woman, “Let me see that purse, my
worthy and sturdy friend.” She handed it to him at once, and the
governor returned it to the man, and said to the unforced mistress of
force, “Sister, if you had shown as much, or only half as much, spirit
and vigour in defending your body as you have shown in defending that
purse, the strength of Hercules could not have forced you. Be off, and
God speed you, and bad luck to you, and don’t show your face in all
this island, or within six leagues of it on any side, under pain of two
hundred lashes; be off at once, I say, you shameless, cheating shrew.”

The woman was cowed and went off disconsolately, hanging her head; and
the governor said to the man, “Honest man, go home with your money, and
God speed you; and for the future, if you don’t want to lose it, see
that you don’t take it into your head to yoke with anybody.” The man
thanked him as clumsily as he could and went his way, and the
bystanders were again filled with admiration at their new governor’s
judgments and sentences.

Next, two men, one apparently a farm labourer, and the other a tailor,
for he had a pair of shears in his hand, presented themselves before
him, and the tailor said, “Señor governor, this labourer and I come
before your worship by reason of this honest man coming to my shop
yesterday (for saving everybody’s presence I’m a passed tailor, God be
thanked), and putting a piece of cloth into my hands and asking me,
‘Se