disagreeable breath that one
cannot bear to be near her for a moment; and even my lady the
duchess—but I’ll hold my tongue, for they say that walls have ears.”

“For heaven’s sake, Doña Rodriguez, what ails my lady the duchess?”
asked Don Quixote.

“Adjured in that way,” replied the duenna, “I cannot help answering the
question and telling the whole truth. Señor Don Quixote, have you
observed the comeliness of my lady the duchess, that smooth complexion
of hers like a burnished polished sword, those two cheeks of milk and
carmine, that gay lively step with which she treads or rather seems to
spurn the earth, so that one would fancy she went radiating health
wherever she passed? Well then, let me tell you she may thank, first of
all God, for this, and next, two issues that she has, one in each leg,
by which all the evil humours, of which the doctors say she is full,
are discharged.”

“Blessed Virgin!” exclaimed Don Quixote; “and is it possible that my
lady the duchess has drains of that sort? I would not have believed it
if the barefoot friars had told it me; but as the lady Doña Rodriguez
says so, it must be so. But surely such issues, and in such places, do
not discharge humours, but liquid amber. Verily, I do believe now that
this practice of opening issues is a very important matter for the
health.”

Don Quixote had hardly said this, when the chamber door flew open with
a loud bang, and with the start the noise gave her Doña Rodriguez let
the candle fall from her hand, and the room was left as dark as a
wolf’s mouth, as the saying is. Suddenly the poor duenna felt two hands
seize her by the throat, so tightly that she could not croak, while
someone else, without uttering a word, very briskly hoisted up her
petticoats, and with what seemed to be a slipper began to lay on so
heartily that anyone would have felt pity for her; but although Don
Quixote felt it he never stirred from his bed, but lay quiet and
silent, nay apprehensive that his turn for a drubbing might be coming.
Nor was the apprehension an idle one; for leaving the duenna (who did
not dare to cry out) well basted, the silent executioners fell upon Don
Quixote, and stripping him of the sheet and the coverlet, they pinched
him so fast and so hard that he was driven to defend himself with his
fists, and all this in marvellous silence. The battle lasted nearly
half an hour, and then the phantoms fled; Doña Rodriguez gathered up
her skirts, and bemoaning her fate went out without saying a word to
Don Quixote, and he, sorely pinched, puzzled, and dejected, remained
alone, and there we will leave him, wondering who could have been the
perverse enchanter who had reduced him to such a state; but that shall
be told in due season, for Sancho claims our attention, and the
methodical arrangement of the story demands it.



p48e.jpg (28K)



CHAPTER XLIX.
OF WHAT HAPPENED SANCHO IN MAKING THE ROUND OF HIS ISLAND




p49a.jpg (170K)

Full Size



We left the great governor angered and irritated by that
portrait-painting rogue of a farmer who, instructed by the majordomo,
as the majordomo was by the duke, tried to practise upon him; he
however, fool, boor, and clown as he was, held his own against them
all, saying to those round him and to Doctor Pedro Recio, who as soon
as the private business of the duke’s letter was disposed of had
returned to the room, “Now I see plainly enough that judges and
governors ought to be and must be made of brass not to feel the
importunities of the applicants that at all times and all seasons
insist on being heard, and having their business despatched, and their
own affairs and no others attended to, come what may; and if the poor
judge does not hear them and settle the matter—either because he cannot
or because that is not the time set apart for hearing them—forthwith
they abuse him, and run him down, and gnaw at his bones, and even pick
holes in his pedigree. You s