r’s cap made of lint, to mend some bullet-hole, perhaps,
that has gone through his temples, or left him with a crippled arm or
leg. Or if this does not happen, and merciful Heaven watches over him
and keeps him safe and sound, it may be he will be in the same poverty
he was in before, and he must go through more engagements and more
battles, and come victorious out of all before he betters himself; but
miracles of that sort are seldom seen. For tell me, sirs, if you have
ever reflected upon it, by how much do those who have gained by war
fall short of the number of those who have perished in it? No doubt you
will reply that there can be no comparison, that the dead cannot be
numbered, while the living who have been rewarded may be summed up with
three figures. All which is the reverse in the case of men of letters;
for by skirts, to say nothing of sleeves, they all find means of
support; so that though the soldier has more to endure, his reward is
much less. But against all this it may be urged that it is easier to
reward two thousand soldiers, for the former may be remunerated by
giving them places, which must perforce be conferred upon men of their
calling, while the latter can only be recompensed out of the very
property of the master they serve; but this impossibility only
strengthens my argument.

“Putting this, however, aside, for it is a puzzling question for which
it is difficult to find a solution, let us return to the superiority of
arms over letters, a matter still undecided, so many are the arguments
put forward on each side; for besides those I have mentioned, letters
say that without them arms cannot maintain themselves, for war, too,
has its laws and is governed by them, and laws belong to the domain of
letters and men of letters. To this arms make answer that without them
laws cannot be maintained, for by arms states are defended, kingdoms
preserved, cities protected, roads made safe, seas cleared of pirates;
and, in short, if it were not for them, states, kingdoms, monarchies,
cities, ways by sea and land would be exposed to the violence and
confusion which war brings with it, so long as it lasts and is free to
make use of its privileges and powers. And then it is plain that
whatever costs most is valued and deserves to be valued most. To attain
to eminence in letters costs a man time, watching, hunger, nakedness,
headaches, indigestions, and other things of the sort, some of which I
have already referred to. But for a man to come in the ordinary course
of things to be a good soldier costs him all the student suffers, and
in an incomparably higher degree, for at every step he runs the risk of
losing his life. For what dread of want or poverty that can reach or
harass the student can compare with what the soldier feels, who finds
himself beleaguered in some stronghold mounting guard in some ravelin
or cavalier, knows that the enemy is pushing a mine towards the post
where he is stationed, and cannot under any circumstances retire or fly
from the imminent danger that threatens him? All he can do is to inform
his captain of what is going on so that he may try to remedy it by a
counter-mine, and then stand his ground in fear and expectation of the
moment when he will fly up to the clouds without wings and descend into
the deep against his will. And if this seems a trifling risk, let us
see whether it is equalled or surpassed by the encounter of two galleys
stem to stem, in the midst of the open sea, locked and entangled one
with the other, when the soldier has no more standing room than two
feet of the plank of the spur; and yet, though he sees before him
threatening him as many ministers of death as there are cannon of the
foe pointed at him, not a lance length from his body, and sees too that
with the first heedless step he will go down to visit the profundities
of Neptune’s bosom, still with dauntless heart, urged on by honour that
nerves him, he makes h