ving me even a small village to shelter me; but that I could avoid
all this ruin and misfortune if I were willing to marry him; however,
as far as he could see, he never expected that I would consent to a
marriage so unequal; and he said no more than the truth in this, for it
has never entered my mind to marry that giant, or any other, let him be
ever so great or enormous. My father said, too, that when he was dead,
and I saw Pandafilando about to invade my kingdom, I was not to wait
and attempt to defend myself, for that would be destructive to me, but
that I should leave the kingdom entirely open to him if I wished to
avoid the death and total destruction of my good and loyal vassals, for
there would be no possibility of defending myself against the giant’s
devilish power; and that I should at once with some of my followers set
out for Spain, where I should obtain relief in my distress on finding a
certain knight-errant whose fame by that time would extend over the
whole kingdom, and who would be called, if I remember rightly, Don
Azote or Don Gigote.”

“‘Don Quixote,’ he must have said, señora,” observed Sancho at this,
“otherwise called the Knight of the Rueful Countenance.”

“That is it,” said Dorothea; “he said, moreover, that he would be tall
of stature and lank featured; and that on his right side under the left
shoulder, or thereabouts, he would have a grey mole with hairs like
bristles.”

On hearing this, Don Quixote said to his squire, “Here, Sancho my son,
bear a hand and help me to strip, for I want to see if I am the knight
that sage king foretold.”

“What does your worship want to strip for?” said Dorothea.

“To see if I have that mole your father spoke of,” answered Don
Quixote.

“There is no occasion to strip,” said Sancho; “for I know your worship
has just such a mole on the middle of your backbone, which is the mark
of a strong man.”

“That is enough,” said Dorothea, “for with friends we must not look too
closely into trifles; and whether it be on the shoulder or on the
backbone matters little; it is enough if there is a mole, be it where
it may, for it is all the same flesh; no doubt my good father hit the
truth in every particular, and I have made a lucky hit in commending
myself to Don Quixote; for he is the one my father spoke of, as the
features of his countenance correspond with those assigned to this
knight by that wide fame he has acquired not only in Spain but in all
La Mancha; for I had scarcely landed at Osuna when I heard such
accounts of his achievements, that at once my heart told me he was the
very one I had come in search of.”

“But how did you land at Osuna, señora,” asked Don Quixote, “when it is
not a seaport?”

But before Dorothea could reply the curate anticipated her, saying,
“The princess meant to say that after she had landed at Malaga the
first place where she heard of your worship was Osuna.”

“That is what I meant to say,” said Dorothea.

“And that would be only natural,” said the curate. “Will your majesty
please proceed?”

“There is no more to add,” said Dorothea, “save that in finding Don
Quixote I have had such good fortune, that I already reckon and regard
myself queen and mistress of my entire dominions, since of his courtesy
and magnanimity he has granted me the boon of accompanying me
whithersoever I may conduct him, which will be only to bring him face
to face with Pandafilando of the Scowl, that he may slay him and
restore to me what has been unjustly usurped by him: for all this must
come to pass satisfactorily since my good father Tinacrio the Sapient
foretold it, who likewise left it declared in writing in Chaldee or
Greek characters (for I cannot read them), that if this predicted
knight, after having cut the giant’s throat, should be disposed to
marry me I was to offer myself at once without demur as his lawful
wife, and yield him possession of my kingdom together with my person.”

“What thin