ised Cardenio by his voice, as he had recognised
her. Cardenio also heard Dorothea’s cry as she fell fainting, and
imagining that it came from his Luscinda burst forth in terror from the
room, and the first thing he saw was Don Fernando with Luscinda in his
arms. Don Fernando, too, knew Cardenio at once; and all three,
Luscinda, Cardenio, and Dorothea, stood in silent amazement scarcely
knowing what had happened to them.

They gazed at one another without speaking, Dorothea at Don Fernando,
Don Fernando at Cardenio, Cardenio at Luscinda, and Luscinda at
Cardenio. The first to break silence was Luscinda, who thus addressed
Don Fernando: “Leave me, Señor Don Fernando, for the sake of what you
owe to yourself; if no other reason will induce you, leave me to cling
to the wall of which I am the ivy, to the support from which neither
your importunities, nor your threats, nor your promises, nor your gifts
have been able to detach me. See how Heaven, by ways strange and hidden
from our sight, has brought me face to face with my true husband; and
well you know by dear-bought experience that death alone will be able
to efface him from my memory. May this plain declaration, then, lead
you, as you can do nothing else, to turn your love into rage, your
affection into resentment, and so to take my life; for if I yield it up
in the presence of my beloved husband I count it well bestowed; it may
be by my death he will be convinced that I kept my faith to him to the
last moment of life.”

Meanwhile Dorothea had come to herself, and had heard Luscinda’s words,
by means of which she divined who she was; but seeing that Don Fernando
did not yet release her or reply to her, summoning up her resolution as
well as she could she rose and knelt at his feet, and with a flood of
bright and touching tears addressed him thus:

“If, my lord, the beams of that sun that thou holdest eclipsed in thine
arms did not dazzle and rob thine eyes of sight thou wouldst have seen
by this time that she who kneels at thy feet is, so long as thou wilt
have it so, the unhappy and unfortunate Dorothea. I am that lowly
peasant girl whom thou in thy goodness or for thy pleasure wouldst
raise high enough to call herself thine; I am she who in the seclusion
of innocence led a contented life until at the voice of thy
importunity, and thy true and tender passion, as it seemed, she opened
the gates of her modesty and surrendered to thee the keys of her
liberty; a gift received by thee but thanklessly, as is clearly shown
by my forced retreat to the place where thou dost find me, and by thy
appearance under the circumstances in which I see thee. Nevertheless, I
would not have thee suppose that I have come here driven by my shame;
it is only grief and sorrow at seeing myself forgotten by thee that
have led me. It was thy will to make me thine, and thou didst so follow
thy will, that now, even though thou repentest, thou canst not help
being mine. Bethink thee, my lord, the unsurpassable affection I bear
thee may compensate for the beauty and noble birth for which thou
wouldst desert me. Thou canst not be the fair Luscinda’s because thou
art mine, nor can she be thine because she is Cardenio’s; and it will
be easier, remember, to bend thy will to love one who adores thee, than
to lead one to love thee who abhors thee now. Thou didst address
thyself to my simplicity, thou didst lay siege to my virtue, thou wert
not ignorant of my station, well dost thou know how I yielded wholly to
thy will; there is no ground or reason for thee to plead deception, and
if it be so, as it is, and if thou art a Christian as thou art a
gentleman, why dost thou by such subterfuges put off making me as happy
at last as thou didst at first? And if thou wilt not have me for what I
am, thy true and lawful wife, at least take and accept me as thy slave,
for so long as I am thine I will count myself happy and fortunate. Do
not by deserting me let my 