ilver
basin, another with a jug also of silver, a third with two fine white
towels on her shoulder, and the fourth with her arms bared to the
elbows, and in her white hands (for white they certainly were) a round
ball of Naples soap. The one with the basin approached, and with arch
composure and impudence, thrust it under Don Quixote’s chin, who,
wondering at such a ceremony, said never a word, supposing it to be the
custom of that country to wash beards instead of hands; he therefore
stretched his out as far as he could, and at the same instant the jug
began to pour and the damsel with the soap rubbed his beard briskly,
raising snow-flakes, for the soap lather was no less white, not only
over the beard, but all over the face, and over the eyes of the
submissive knight, so that they were perforce obliged to keep shut. The
duke and duchess, who had not known anything about this, waited to see
what came of this strange washing. The barber damsel, when she had him
a hand’s breadth deep in lather, pretended that there was no more
water, and bade the one with the jug go and fetch some, while Señor Don
Quixote waited. She did so, and Don Quixote was left the strangest and
most ludicrous figure that could be imagined. All those present, and
there were a good many, were watching him, and as they saw him there
with half a yard of neck, and that uncommonly brown, his eyes shut, and
his beard full of soap, it was a great wonder, and only by great
discretion, that they were able to restrain their laughter. The
damsels, the concocters of the joke, kept their eyes down, not daring
to look at their master and mistress; and as for them, laughter and
anger struggled within them, and they knew not what to do, whether to
punish the audacity of the girls, or to reward them for the amusement
they had received from seeing Don Quixote in such a plight.

At length the damsel with the jug returned and they made an end of
washing Don Quixote, and the one who carried the towels very
deliberately wiped him and dried him; and all four together making him
a profound obeisance and curtsey, they were about to go, when the duke,
lest Don Quixote should see through the joke, called out to the one
with the basin saying, “Come and wash me, and take care that there is
water enough.” The girl, sharp-witted and prompt, came and placed the
basin for the duke as she had done for Don Quixote, and they soon had
him well soaped and washed, and having wiped him dry they made their
obeisance and retired. It appeared afterwards that the duke had sworn
that if they had not washed him as they had Don Quixote he would have
punished them for their impudence, which they adroitly atoned for by
soaping him as well.

Sancho observed the ceremony of the washing very attentively, and said
to himself, “God bless me, if it were only the custom in this country
to wash squires’ beards too as well as knights’. For by God and upon my
soul I want it badly; and if they gave me a scrape of the razor besides
I’d take it as a still greater kindness.”

“What are you saying to yourself, Sancho?” asked the duchess.

“I was saying, señora,” he replied, “that in the courts of other
princes, when the cloth is taken away, I have always heard say they
give water for the hands, but not lye for the beard; and that shows it
is good to live long that you may see much; to be sure, they say too
that he who lives a long life must undergo much evil, though to undergo
a washing of that sort is pleasure rather than pain.”

“Don’t be uneasy, friend Sancho,” said the duchess; “I will take care
that my damsels wash you, and even put you in the tub if necessary.”

“I’ll be content with the beard,” said Sancho, “at any rate for the
present; and as for the future, God has decreed what is to be.”

“Attend to worthy Sancho’s request, seneschal,” said the duchess, “and
do exactly what he wishes.”

The seneschal replied that Señor Sancho should be obeyed 