rtesy and generosity; for such they
regarded his leaving them their own money. Señora Doña Guiomar de
Quiñones wanted to throw herself out of the coach to kiss the feet and
hands of the great Roque, but he would not suffer it on any account; so
far from that, he begged her pardon for the wrong he had done her under
pressure of the inexorable necessities of his unfortunate calling. The
regent’s lady ordered one of her servants to give the eighty crowns
that had been assessed as her share at once, for the captains had
already paid down their sixty. The pilgrims were about to give up the
whole of their little hoard, but Roque bade them keep quiet, and
turning to his men he said, “Of these crowns two fall to each man and
twenty remain over; let ten be given to these pilgrims, and the other
ten to this worthy squire that he may be able to speak favourably of
this adventure;” and then having writing materials, with which he
always went provided, brought to him, he gave them in writing a
safe-conduct to the leaders of his bands; and bidding them farewell let
them go free and filled with admiration at his magnanimity, his
generous disposition, and his unusual conduct, and inclined to regard
him as an Alexander the Great rather than a notorious robber.

One of the squires observed in his mixture of Gascon and Catalan, “This
captain of ours would make a better friar than highwayman; if he wants
to be so generous another time, let it be with his own property and not
ours.”



p60f.jpg (426K)

Full Size



The unlucky wight did not speak so low but that Roque overheard him,
and drawing his sword almost split his head in two, saying, “That is
the way I punish impudent saucy fellows.” They were all taken aback,
and not one of them dared to utter a word, such deference did they pay
him. Roque then withdrew to one side and wrote a letter to a friend of
his at Barcelona, telling him that the famous Don Quixote of La Mancha,
the knight-errant of whom there was so much talk, was with him, and
was, he assured him, the drollest and wisest man in the world; and that
in four days from that date, that is to say, on Saint John the
Baptist’s Day, he was going to deposit him in full armour mounted on
his horse Rocinante, together with his squire Sancho on an ass, in the
middle of the strand of the city; and bidding him give notice of this
to his friends the Niarros, that they might divert themselves with him.
He wished, he said, his enemies the Cadells could be deprived of this
pleasure; but that was impossible, because the crazes and shrewd
sayings of Don Quixote and the humours of his squire Sancho Panza could
not help giving general pleasure to all the world. He despatched the
letter by one of his squires, who, exchanging the costume of a
highwayman for that of a peasant, made his way into Barcelona and gave
it to the person to whom it was directed.



p60g.jpg (42K)



CHAPTER LXI.
OF WHAT HAPPENED DON QUIXOTE ON ENTERING BARCELONA, TOGETHER WITH OTHER
MATTERS THAT PARTAKE OF THE TRUE RATHER THAN OF THE INGENIOUS




p61a.jpg (143K)

Full Size



Don Quixote passed three days and three nights with Roque, and had he
passed three hundred years he would have found enough to observe and
wonder at in his mode of life. At daybreak they were in one spot, at
dinner-time in another; sometimes they fled without knowing from whom,
at other times they lay in wait, not knowing for what. They slept
standing, breaking their slumbers to shift from place to place. There
was nothing but sending out spies and scouts, posting sentinels and
blowing the matches of harquebusses, though they carried but few, for
almost all used flintlocks. Roque passed his nights in some place or
other apart from his men, that they might not know where he was, for
the many proclamations the viceroy of Barcelona had issued against his
life kept him in fear and uneasiness, and he did not venture to trust
any