at may lie within my power; and as you are about it
you may enclose a kiss of the hand to my master Don Quixote that he may
see I am grateful bread; and as a good secretary and a good Biscayan
you may add whatever you like and whatever will come in best; and now
take away this cloth and give me something to eat, and I’ll be ready to
meet all the spies and assassins and enchanters that may come against
me or my island.”

At this instant a page entered saying, “Here is a farmer on business,
who wants to speak to your lordship on a matter of great importance, he
says.”

“It’s very odd,” said Sancho, “the ways of these men on business; is it
possible they can be such fools as not to see that an hour like this is
no hour for coming on business? We who govern and we who are judges—are
we not men of flesh and blood, and are we not to be allowed the time
required for taking rest, unless they’d have us made of marble? By God
and on my conscience, if the government remains in my hands (which I
have a notion it won’t), I’ll bring more than one man on business to
order. However, tell this good man to come in; but take care first of
all that he is not some spy or one of my assassins.”

“No, my lord,” said the page, “for he looks like a simple fellow, and
either I know very little or he is as good as good bread.”

“There is nothing to be afraid of,” said the majordomo, “for we are all
here.”

“Would it be possible, carver,” said Sancho, “now that Doctor Pedro
Recio is not here, to let me eat something solid and substantial, if it
were even a piece of bread and an onion?”

“To-night at supper,” said the carver, “the shortcomings of the dinner
shall be made good, and your lordship shall be fully contented.”

“God grant it,” said Sancho.

The farmer now came in, a well-favoured man that one might see a
thousand leagues off was an honest fellow and a good soul. The first
thing he said was, “Which is the lord governor here?”

“Which should it be,” said the secretary, “but he who is seated in the
chair?”

“Then I humble myself before him,” said the farmer; and going on his
knees he asked for his hand, to kiss it. Sancho refused it, and bade
him stand up and say what he wanted. The farmer obeyed, and then said,
“I am a farmer, señor, a native of Miguelturra, a village two leagues
from Ciudad Real.”

“Another Tirteafuera!” said Sancho; “say on, brother; I know
Miguelturra very well I can tell you, for it’s not very far from my own
town.”

“The case is this, señor,” continued the farmer, “that by God’s mercy I
am married with the leave and licence of the holy Roman Catholic
Church; I have two sons, students, and the younger is studying to
become bachelor, and the elder to be licentiate; I am a widower, for my
wife died, or more properly speaking, a bad doctor killed her on my
hands, giving her a purge when she was with child; and if it had
pleased God that the child had been born, and was a boy, I would have
put him to study for doctor, that he might not envy his brothers the
bachelor and the licentiate.”

“So that if your wife had not died, or had not been killed, you would
not now be a widower,” said Sancho.

“No, señor, certainly not,” said the farmer.

“We’ve got that much settled,” said Sancho; “get on, brother, for it’s
more bed-time than business-time.”

“Well then,” said the farmer, “this son of mine who is going to be a
bachelor, fell in love in the said town with a damsel called Clara
Perlerina, daughter of Andres Perlerino, a very rich farmer; and this
name of Perlerines does not come to them by ancestry or descent, but
because all the family are paralytics, and for a better name they call
them Perlerines; though to tell the truth the damsel is as fair as an
Oriental pearl, and like a flower of the field, if you look at her on
the right side; on the left not so much, for on that side she wants an
eye that she lost by small-pox; and though her face is thickly a