, as indeed they were until “Don Quixote” was
written. Cervantes, indeed, to the last generously and manfully
declared his admiration of Lope’s powers, his unfailing invention, and
his marvellous fertility; but in the preface of the First Part of “Don
Quixote” and in the verses of “Urganda the Unknown,” and one or two
other places, there are, if we read between the lines, sly hits at
Lope’s vanities and affectations that argue no personal good-will; and
Lope openly sneers at “Don Quixote” and Cervantes, and fourteen years
after his death gives him only a few lines of cold commonplace in the
“Laurel de Apolo,” that seem all the colder for the eulogies of a host
of nonentities whose names are found nowhere else.

In 1601 Valladolid was made the seat of the Court, and at the beginning
of 1603 Cervantes had been summoned thither in connection with the
balance due by him to the Treasury, which was still outstanding. He
remained at Valladolid, apparently supporting himself by agencies and
scrivener’s work of some sort; probably drafting petitions and drawing
up statements of claims to be presented to the Council, and the like.
So, at least, we gather from the depositions taken on the occasion of
the death of a gentleman, the victim of a street brawl, who had been
carried into the house in which he lived. In these he himself is
described as a man who wrote and transacted business, and it appears
that his household then consisted of his wife, the natural daughter
Isabel de Saavedra already mentioned, his sister Andrea, now a widow,
her daughter Constanza, a mysterious Magdalena de Sotomayor calling
herself his sister, for whom his biographers cannot account, and a
servant-maid.

Meanwhile “Don Quixote” had been growing in favour, and its author’s
name was now known beyond the Pyrenees. In 1607 an edition was printed
at Brussels. Robles, the Madrid publisher, found it necessary to meet
the demand by a third edition, the seventh in all, in 1608. The
popularity of the book in Italy was such that a Milan bookseller was
led to bring out an edition in 1610; and another was called for in
Brussels in 1611. It might naturally have been expected that, with such
proofs before him that he had hit the taste of the public, Cervantes
would have at once set about redeeming his rather vague promise of a
second volume.

But, to all appearance, nothing was farther from his thoughts. He had
still by him one or two short tales of the same vintage as those he had
inserted in “Don Quixote” and instead of continuing the adventures of
Don Quixote, he set to work to write more of these “Novelas Exemplares”
as he afterwards called them, with a view to making a book of them.

The novels were published in the summer of 1613, with a dedication to
the Conde de Lemos, the Maecenas of the day, and with one of those
chatty confidential prefaces Cervantes was so fond of. In this, eight
years and a half after the First Part of “Don Quixote” had appeared, we
get the first hint of a forthcoming Second Part. “You shall see
shortly,” he says, “the further exploits of Don Quixote and humours of
Sancho Panza.” His idea of “shortly” was a somewhat elastic one, for,
as we know by the date to Sancho’s letter, he had barely one-half of
the book completed that time twelvemonth.

But more than poems, or pastorals, or novels, it was his dramatic
ambition that engrossed his thoughts. The same indomitable spirit that
kept him from despair in the bagnios of Algiers, and prompted him to
attempt the escape of himself and his comrades again and again, made
him persevere in spite of failure and discouragement in his efforts to
win the ear of the public as a dramatist. The temperament of Cervantes
was essentially sanguine. The portrait he draws in the preface to the
novels, with the aquiline features, chestnut hair, smooth untroubled
forehead, and bright cheerful eyes, is the very portrait of a sanguine
man. Nothing that the ma