I
belong, and the vow I took therein to give aid to those in need and
under the oppression of the strong. But as I know that it is a mark of
prudence not to do by foul means what may be done by fair, I will ask
these gentlemen, the guards and commissary, to be so good as to release
you and let you go in peace, as there will be no lack of others to
serve the king under more favourable circumstances; for it seems to me
a hard case to make slaves of those whom God and nature have made free.
Moreover, sirs of the guard,” added Don Quixote, “these poor fellows
have done nothing to you; let each answer for his own sins yonder;
there is a God in Heaven who will not forget to punish the wicked or
reward the good; and it is not fitting that honest men should be the
instruments of punishment to others, they being therein no way
concerned. This request I make thus gently and quietly, that, if you
comply with it, I may have reason for thanking you; and, if you will
not voluntarily, this lance and sword together with the might of my arm
shall compel you to comply with it by force.”

“Nice nonsense!” said the commissary; “a fine piece of pleasantry he
has come out with at last! He wants us to let the king’s prisoners go,
as if we had any authority to release them, or he to order us to do so!
Go your way, sir, and good luck to you; put that basin straight that
you’ve got on your head, and don’t go looking for three feet on a cat.”

“’Tis you that are the cat, rat, and rascal,” replied Don Quixote, and
acting on the word he fell upon him so suddenly that without giving him
time to defend himself he brought him to the ground sorely wounded with
a lance-thrust; and lucky it was for him that it was the one that had
the musket. The other guards stood thunderstruck and amazed at this
unexpected event, but recovering presence of mind, those on horseback
seized their swords, and those on foot their javelins, and attacked Don
Quixote, who was waiting for them with great calmness; and no doubt it
would have gone badly with him if the galley slaves, seeing the chance
before them of liberating themselves, had not effected it by contriving
to break the chain on which they were strung. Such was the confusion,
that the guards, now rushing at the galley slaves who were breaking
loose, now to attack Don Quixote who was waiting for them, did nothing
at all that was of any use. Sancho, on his part, gave a helping hand to
release Gines de Pasamonte, who was the first to leap forth upon the
plain free and unfettered, and who, attacking the prostrate commissary,
took from him his sword and the musket, with which, aiming at one and
levelling at another, he, without ever discharging it, drove every one
of the guards off the field, for they took to flight, as well to escape
Pasamonte’s musket, as the showers of stones the now released galley
slaves were raining upon them. Sancho was greatly grieved at the
affair, because he anticipated that those who had fled would report the
matter to the Holy Brotherhood, who at the summons of the alarm-bell
would at once sally forth in quest of the offenders; and he said so to
his master, and entreated him to leave the place at once, and go into
hiding in the sierra that was close by.

“That is all very well,” said Don Quixote, “but I know what must be
done now;” and calling together all the galley slaves, who were now
running riot, and had stripped the commissary to the skin, he collected
them round him to hear what he had to say, and addressed them as
follows: “To be grateful for benefits received is the part of persons
of good birth, and one of the sins most offensive to God is
ingratitude; I say so because, sirs, ye have already seen by manifest
proof the benefit ye have received of me; in return for which I desire,
and it is my good pleasure that, laden with that chain which I have
taken off your necks, ye at once set out and proceed to the city of El
Toboso, and t