ho; “keep cool, for as
I now see, the devil has let Dapple go and he is coming back to his old
quarters;” and so it turned out, for, having come down with Dapple, in
imitation of Don Quixote and Rocinante, the devil made off on foot to
the town, and the ass came back to his master.

“For all that,” said Don Quixote, “it will be well to visit the
discourtesy of that devil upon some of those in the cart, even if it
were the emperor himself.”

“Don’t think of it, your worship,” returned Sancho; “take my advice and
never meddle with actors, for they are a favoured class; I myself have
known an actor taken up for two murders, and yet come off scot-free;
remember that, as they are merry folk who give pleasure, everyone
favours and protects them, and helps and makes much of them, above all
when they are those of the royal companies and under patent, all or
most of whom in dress and appearance look like princes.”

“Still, for all that,” said Don Quixote, “the player devil must not go
off boasting, even if the whole human race favours him.”

So saying, he made for the cart, which was now very near the town,
shouting out as he went, “Stay! halt! ye merry, jovial crew! I want to
teach you how to treat asses and animals that serve the squires of
knights-errant for steeds.”

So loud were the shouts of Don Quixote, that those in the cart heard
and understood them, and, guessing by the words what the speaker’s
intention was, Death in an instant jumped out of the cart, and the
emperor, the devil carter and the angel after him, nor did the queen or
the god Cupid stay behind; and all armed themselves with stones and
formed in line, prepared to receive Don Quixote on the points of their
pebbles. Don Quixote, when he saw them drawn up in such a gallant array
with uplifted arms ready for a mighty discharge of stones, checked
Rocinante and began to consider in what way he could attack them with
the least danger to himself. As he halted Sancho came up, and seeing
him disposed to attack this well-ordered squadron, said to him, “It
would be the height of madness to attempt such an enterprise; remember,
señor, that against sops from the brook, and plenty of them, there is
no defensive armour in the world, except to stow oneself away under a
brass bell; and besides, one should remember that it is rashness, and
not valour, for a single man to attack an army that has Death in it,
and where emperors fight in person, with angels, good and bad, to help
them; and if this reflection will not make you keep quiet, perhaps it
will to know for certain that among all these, though they look like
kings, princes, and emperors, there is not a single knight-errant.”

“Now indeed thou hast hit the point, Sancho,” said Don Quixote, “which
may and should turn me from the resolution I had already formed. I
cannot and must not draw sword, as I have many a time before told thee,
against anyone who is not a dubbed knight; it is for thee, Sancho, if
thou wilt, to take vengeance for the wrong done to thy Dapple; and I
will help thee from here by shouts and salutary counsels.”

“There is no occasion to take vengeance on anyone, señor,” replied
Sancho; “for it is not the part of good Christians to revenge wrongs;
and besides, I will arrange it with my ass to leave his grievance to my
good-will and pleasure, and that is to live in peace as long as heaven
grants me life.”

“Well,” said Don Quixote, “if that be thy determination, good Sancho,
sensible Sancho, Christian Sancho, honest Sancho, let us leave these
phantoms alone and turn to the pursuit of better and worthier
adventures; for, from what I see of this country, we cannot fail to
find plenty of marvellous ones in it.”

He at once wheeled about, Sancho ran to take possession of his Dapple,
Death and his flying squadron returned to their cart and pursued their
journey, and thus the dread adventure of the cart of Death ended
happily, thanks to the advice Sanch