g to his history, on finding himself rejected by
his lady Oriana, who had ordered him not to appear in her presence
until it should be her pleasure, all he did was to retire to the Peña
Pobre in company with a hermit, and there he took his fill of weeping
until Heaven sent him relief in the midst of his great grief and need.
And if this be true, as it is, why should I now take the trouble to
strip stark naked, or do mischief to these trees which have done me no
harm, or why am I to disturb the clear waters of these brooks which
will give me to drink whenever I have a mind? Long live the memory of
Amadis and let him be imitated so far as is possible by Don Quixote of
La Mancha, of whom it will be said, as was said of the other, that if
he did not achieve great things, he died in attempting them; and if I
am not repulsed or rejected by my Dulcinea, it is enough for me, as I
have said, to be absent from her. And so, now to business; come to my
memory ye deeds of Amadis, and show me how I am to begin to imitate
you. I know already that what he chiefly did was to pray and commend
himself to God; but what am I to do for a rosary, for I have not got
one?”

And then it occurred to him how he might make one, and that was by
tearing a great strip off the tail of his shirt which hung down, and
making eleven knots on it, one bigger than the rest, and this served
him for a rosary all the time he was there, during which he repeated
countless ave-marias. But what distressed him greatly was not having
another hermit there to confess him and receive consolation from; and
so he solaced himself with pacing up and down the little meadow, and
writing and carving on the bark of the trees and on the fine sand a
multitude of verses all in harmony with his sadness, and some in praise
of Dulcinea; but, when he was found there afterwards, the only ones
completely legible that could be discovered were those that follow
here:

Ye on the mountainside that grow,
Ye green things all, trees, shrubs, and bushes,
Are ye aweary of the woe
That this poor aching bosom crushes?
If it disturb you, and I owe
Some reparation, it may be a
Defence for me to let you know
Don Quixote’s tears are on the flow,
And all for distant Dulcinea
Del Toboso.

The lealest lover time can show,
Doomed for a lady-love to languish,
Among these solitudes doth go,
A prey to every kind of anguish.
Why Love should like a spiteful foe
Thus use him, he hath no idea,
But hogsheads full—this doth he know—
Don Quixote’s tears are on the flow,
And all for distant Dulcinea
Del Toboso.

Adventure-seeking doth he go
Up rugged heights, down rocky valleys,
But hill or dale, or high or low,
Mishap attendeth all his sallies:
Love still pursues him to and fro,
And plies his cruel scourge—ah me! a
Relentless fate, an endless woe;
Don Quixote’s tears are on the flow,
And all for distant Dulcinea
Del Toboso.


The addition of “Del Toboso” to Dulcinea’s name gave rise to no little
laughter among those who found the above lines, for they suspected Don
Quixote must have fancied that unless he added “del Toboso” when he
introduced the name of Dulcinea the verse would be unintelligible;
which was indeed the fact, as he himself afterwards admitted. He wrote
many more, but, as has been said, these three verses were all that
could be plainly and perfectly deciphered. In this way, and in sighing
and calling on the fauns and satyrs of the woods and the nymphs of the
streams, and Echo, moist and mournful, to answer, console, and hear
him, as well as in looking for herbs to sustain him, he passed his time
until Sancho’s return; and had that been delayed three weeks, as it was
three days, the Knight of the Rueful Countenance would have worn such
an altered countenance that the mother that bore him would not have
known him: and here it will be well to leave him, wrapped up in sighs
and verses, to relate how Sancho Panza fared on his mission.