 Dulcinea—”

“Leave off conjuring me,” said Don Quixote, “and ask what thou wouldst
know; I have already told thee I will answer with all possible
precision.”

“That is what I want,” said Sancho; “and what I would know, and have
you tell me, without adding or leaving out anything, but telling the
whole truth as one expects it to be told, and as it is told, by all who
profess arms, as your worship professes them, under the title of
knights-errant—”

“I tell thee I will not lie in any particular,” said Don Quixote;
“finish thy question; for in truth thou weariest me with all these
asseverations, requirements, and precautions, Sancho.”

“Well, I rely on the goodness and truth of my master,” said Sancho;
“and so, because it bears upon what we are talking about, I would ask,
speaking with all reverence, whether since your worship has been shut
up and, as you think, enchanted in this cage, you have felt any desire
or inclination to go anywhere, as the saying is?”

“I do not understand ‘going anywhere,’” said Don Quixote; “explain
thyself more clearly, Sancho, if thou wouldst have me give an answer to
the point.”

“Is it possible,” said Sancho, “that your worship does not understand
‘going anywhere’? Why, the schoolboys know that from the time they were
babes. Well then, you must know I mean have you had any desire to do
what cannot be avoided?”

“Ah! now I understand thee, Sancho,” said Don Quixote; “yes, often, and
even this minute; get me out of this strait, or all will not go right.”



c48e.jpg (32K)



CHAPTER XLIX.
WHICH TREATS OF THE SHREWD CONVERSATION WHICH SANCHO PANZA HELD WITH
HIS MASTER DON QUIXOTE




c49a.jpg (181K)

Full Size




“Aha, I have caught you,” said Sancho; “this is what in my heart and
soul I was longing to know. Come now, señor, can you deny what is
commonly said around us, when a person is out of humour, ‘I don’t know
what ails so-and-so, that he neither eats, nor drinks, nor sleeps, nor
gives a proper answer to any question; one would think he was
enchanted’? From which it is to be gathered that those who do not eat,
or drink, or sleep, or do any of the natural acts I am speaking of—that
such persons are enchanted; but not those that have the desire your
worship has, and drink when drink is given them, and eat when there is
anything to eat, and answer every question that is asked them.”

“What thou sayest is true, Sancho,” replied Don Quixote; “but I have
already told thee there are many sorts of enchantments, and it may be
that in the course of time they have been changed one for another, and
that now it may be the way with enchanted people to do all that I do,
though they did not do so before; so it is vain to argue or draw
inferences against the usage of the time. I know and feel that I am
enchanted, and that is enough to ease my conscience; for it would weigh
heavily on it if I thought that I was not enchanted, and that in a
faint-hearted and cowardly way I allowed myself to lie in this cage,
defrauding multitudes of the succour I might afford to those in need
and distress, who at this very moment may be in sore want of my aid and
protection.”

“Still for all that,” replied Sancho, “I say that, for your greater and
fuller satisfaction, it would be well if your worship were to try to
get out of this prison (and I promise to do all in my power to help,
and even to take you out of it), and see if you could once more mount
your good Rocinante, who seems to be enchanted too, he is so melancholy
and dejected; and then we might try our chance in looking for
adventures again; and if we have no luck there will be time enough to
go back to the cage; in which, on the faith of a good and loyal squire,
I promise to shut myself up along with your worship, if so be you are
so unfortunate, or I so stupid, as not to be able to carry out my
plan.”

“I am content to do as thou sayest, brother Sancho,” said Don Quixote,
“and whe