tness with a thousand million charms of mind! But one
thing thou wilt not deny, Sancho; when thou camest close to her didst
thou not perceive a Sabæan odour, an aromatic fragrance, a, I know not
what, delicious, that I cannot find a name for; I mean a redolence, an
exhalation, as if thou wert in the shop of some dainty glover?”

“All I can say is,” said Sancho, “that I did perceive a little odour,
something goaty; it must have been that she was all in a sweat with
hard work.”

“It could not be that,” said Don Quixote, “but thou must have been
suffering from cold in the head, or must have smelt thyself; for I know
well what would be the scent of that rose among thorns, that lily of
the field, that dissolved amber.”

“Maybe so,” replied Sancho; “there often comes from myself that same
odour which then seemed to me to come from her grace the lady Dulcinea;
but that’s no wonder, for one devil is like another.”

“Well then,” continued Don Quixote, “now she has done sifting the corn
and sent it to the mill; what did she do when she read the letter?”

“As for the letter,” said Sancho, “she did not read it, for she said
she could neither read nor write; instead of that she tore it up into
small pieces, saying that she did not want to let anyone read it lest
her secrets should become known in the village, and that what I had
told her by word of mouth about the love your worship bore her, and the
extraordinary penance you were doing for her sake, was enough; and, to
make an end of it, she told me to tell your worship that she kissed
your hands, and that she had a greater desire to see you than to write
to you; and that therefore she entreated and commanded you, on sight of
this present, to come out of these thickets, and to have done with
carrying on absurdities, and to set out at once for El Toboso, unless
something else of greater importance should happen, for she had a great
desire to see your worship. She laughed greatly when I told her how
your worship was called The Knight of the Rueful Countenance; I asked
her if that Biscayan the other day had been there; and she told me he
had, and that he was an honest fellow; I asked her too about the galley
slaves, but she said she had not seen any as yet.”

“So far all goes well,” said Don Quixote; “but tell me what jewel was
it that she gave thee on taking thy leave, in return for thy tidings of
me? For it is a usual and ancient custom with knights and ladies errant
to give the squires, damsels, or dwarfs who bring tidings of their
ladies to the knights, or of their knights to the ladies, some rich
jewel as a guerdon for good news, and acknowledgment of the message.”

“That is very likely,” said Sancho, “and a good custom it was, to my
mind; but that must have been in days gone by, for now it would seem to
be the custom only to give a piece of bread and cheese; because that
was what my lady Dulcinea gave me over the top of the yard-wall when I
took leave of her; and more by token it was sheep’s-milk cheese.”

“She is generous in the extreme,” said Don Quixote, “and if she did not
give thee a jewel of gold, no doubt it must have been because she had
not one to hand there to give thee; but sleeves are good after Easter;
I shall see her and all shall be made right. But knowest thou what
amazes me, Sancho? It seems to me thou must have gone and come through
the air, for thou hast taken but little more than three days to go to
El Toboso and return, though it is more than thirty leagues from here
to there. From which I am inclined to think that the sage magician who
is my friend, and watches over my interests (for of necessity there is
and must be one, or else I should not be a right knight-errant), that
this same, I say, must have helped thee to travel without thy
knowledge; for some of these sages will catch up a knight-errant
sleeping in his bed, and without his knowing how or in what way it
happened, he wakes up the next day m