f a quarter.

“Go on, Sancho my friend, and be not disheartened,” said Don Quixote;
“for I double the stakes as to price.”

“In that case,” said Sancho, “in God’s hand be it, and let it rain
lashes.” But the rogue no longer laid them on his shoulders, but laid
on to the trees, with such groans every now and then, that one would
have thought at each of them his soul was being plucked up by the
roots. Don Quixote, touched to the heart, and fearing he might make an
end of himself, and that through Sancho’s imprudence he might miss his
own object, said to him, “As thou livest, my friend, let the matter
rest where it is, for the remedy seems to me a very rough one, and it
will be well to have patience; ‘Zamora was not won in an hour.’ If I
have not reckoned wrong thou hast given thyself over a thousand lashes;
that is enough for the present; ‘for the ass,’ to put it in homely
phrase, ‘bears the load, but not the overload.’”

“No, no, señor,” replied Sancho; “it shall never be said of me, ‘The
money paid, the arms broken;’ go back a little further, your worship,
and let me give myself at any rate a thousand lashes more; for in a
couple of bouts like this we shall have finished off the lot, and there
will be even cloth to spare.”

“As thou art in such a willing mood,” said Don Quixote, “may heaven aid
thee; lay on and I’ll retire.”

Sancho returned to his task with so much resolution that he soon had
the bark stripped off several trees, such was the severity with which
he whipped himself; and one time, raising his voice, and giving a beech
a tremendous lash, he cried out, “Here dies Samson, and all with him!”



p71b.jpg (349K)

Full Size



At the sound of his piteous cry and of the stroke of the cruel lash,
Don Quixote ran to him at once, and seizing the twisted halter that
served him for a courbash, said to him, “Heaven forbid, Sancho my
friend, that to please me thou shouldst lose thy life, which is needed
for the support of thy wife and children; let Dulcinea wait for a
better opportunity, and I will content myself with a hope soon to be
realised, and have patience until thou hast gained fresh strength so as
to finish off this business to the satisfaction of everybody.”

“As your worship will have it so, señor,” said Sancho, “so be it; but
throw your cloak over my shoulders, for I’m sweating and I don’t want
to take cold; it’s a risk that novice disciplinants run.”

Don Quixote obeyed, and stripping himself covered Sancho, who slept
until the sun woke him; they then resumed their journey, which for the
time being they brought to an end at a village that lay three leagues
farther on. They dismounted at a hostelry which Don Quixote recognised
as such and did not take to be a castle with moat, turrets, portcullis,
and drawbridge; for ever since he had been vanquished he talked more
rationally about everything, as will be shown presently. They quartered
him in a room on the ground floor, where in place of leather hangings
there were pieces of painted serge such as they commonly use in
villages. On one of them was painted by some very poor hand the Rape of
Helen, when the bold guest carried her off from Menelaus, and on the
other was the story of Dido and Æneas, she on a high tower, as though
she were making signals with a half sheet to her fugitive guest who was
out at sea flying in a frigate or brigantine. He noticed in the two
stories that Helen did not go very reluctantly, for she was laughing
slyly and roguishly; but the fair Dido was shown dropping tears the
size of walnuts from her eyes. Don Quixote as he looked at them
observed, “Those two ladies were very unfortunate not to have been born
in this age, and I unfortunate above all men not to have been born in
theirs. Had I fallen in with those gentlemen, Troy would not have been
burned or Carthage destroyed, for it would have been only for me to
slay Paris, and all these misfortunes would have been avoid