I say a woman’s advice is no great thing, and he who won’t
take it is a fool.”

“And so say I,” said Don Quixote; “continue, Sancho my friend; go on;
you talk pearls to-day.”

“The fact is,” continued Sancho, “that, as your worship knows better
than I do, we are all of us liable to death, and to-day we are, and
to-morrow we are not, and the lamb goes as soon as the sheep, and
nobody can promise himself more hours of life in this world than God
may be pleased to give him; for death is deaf, and when it comes to
knock at our life’s door, it is always urgent, and neither prayers, nor
struggles, nor sceptres, nor mitres, can keep it back, as common talk
and report say, and as they tell us from the pulpits every day.”

“All that is very true,” said Don Quixote; “but I cannot make out what
thou art driving at.”

“What I am driving at,” said Sancho, “is that your worship settle some
fixed wages for me, to be paid monthly while I am in your service, and
that the same be paid me out of your estate; for I don’t care to stand
on rewards which either come late, or ill, or never at all; God help me
with my own. In short, I would like to know what I am to get, be it
much or little; for the hen will lay on one egg, and many littles make
a much, and so long as one gains something there is nothing lost. To be
sure, if it should happen (what I neither believe nor expect) that your
worship were to give me that island you have promised me, I am not so
ungrateful nor so grasping but that I would be willing to have the
revenue of such island valued and stopped out of my wages in due
promotion.”

“Sancho, my friend,” replied Don Quixote, “sometimes proportion may be
as good as promotion.”

“I see,” said Sancho; “I’ll bet I ought to have said proportion, and
not promotion; but it is no matter, as your worship has understood me.”

“And so well understood,” returned Don Quixote, “that I have seen into
the depths of thy thoughts, and know the mark thou art shooting at with
the countless shafts of thy proverbs. Look here, Sancho, I would
readily fix thy wages if I had ever found any instance in the histories
of the knights-errant to show or indicate, by the slightest hint, what
their squires used to get monthly or yearly; but I have read all or the
best part of their histories, and I cannot remember reading of any
knight-errant having assigned fixed wages to his squire; I only know
that they all served on reward, and that when they least expected it,
if good luck attended their masters, they found themselves recompensed
with an island or something equivalent to it, or at the least they were
left with a title and lordship. If with these hopes and additional
inducements you, Sancho, please to return to my service, well and good;
but to suppose that I am going to disturb or unhinge the ancient usage
of knight-errantry, is all nonsense. And so, my Sancho, get you back to
your house and explain my intentions to your Teresa, and if she likes
and you like to be on reward with me, _bene quidem;_ if not, we remain
friends; for if the pigeon-house does not lack food, it will not lack
pigeons; and bear in mind, my son, that a good hope is better than a
bad holding, and a good grievance better than a bad compensation. I
speak in this way, Sancho, to show you that I can shower down proverbs
just as well as yourself; and in short, I mean to say, and I do say,
that if you don’t like to come on reward with me, and run the same
chance that I run, God be with you and make a saint of you; for I shall
find plenty of squires more obedient and painstaking, and not so
thickheaded or talkative as you are.”

When Sancho heard his master’s firm, resolute language, a cloud came
over the sky with him and the wings of his heart drooped, for he had
made sure that his master would not go without him for all the wealth
of the world; and as he stood there dumbfoundered and moody, Samson
Carrasco came in with the houseke