ide of him and the ass’s pack-saddle
on the other, in fear and trembling as great as Don Quixote’s
perturbation. Each instant the noise increased and came nearer to the
two terrified men, or at least to one, for as to the other, his courage
is known to all. The fact of the matter was that some men were taking
above six hundred pigs to sell at a fair, and were on their way with
them at that hour, and so great was the noise they made and their
grunting and blowing, that they deafened the ears of Don Quixote and
Sancho Panza, and they could not make out what it was. The wide-spread
grunting drove came on in a surging mass, and without showing any
respect for Don Quixote’s dignity or Sancho’s, passed right over the
pair of them, demolishing Sancho’s entrenchments, and not only
upsetting Don Quixote but sweeping Rocinante off his feet into the
bargain; and what with the trampling and the grunting, and the pace at
which the unclean beasts went, pack-saddle, armour, Dapple and
Rocinante were left scattered on the ground and Sancho and Don Quixote
at their wits’ end.

Sancho got up as well as he could and begged his master to give him his
sword, saying he wanted to kill half a dozen of those dirty unmannerly
pigs, for he had by this time found out that that was what they were.

“Let them be, my friend,” said Don Quixote; “this insult is the penalty
of my sin; and it is the righteous chastisement of heaven that jackals
should devour a vanquished knight, and wasps sting him and pigs trample
him under foot.”

“I suppose it is the chastisement of heaven, too,” said Sancho, “that
flies should prick the squires of vanquished knights, and lice eat
them, and hunger assail them. If we squires were the sons of the
knights we serve, or their very near relations, it would be no wonder
if the penalty of their misdeeds overtook us, even to the fourth
generation. But what have the Panzas to do with the Quixotes? Well,
well, let’s lie down again and sleep out what little of the night
there’s left, and God will send us dawn and we shall be all right.”



p68b.jpg (345K)

Full Size



“Sleep thou, Sancho,” returned Don Quixote, “for thou wast born to
sleep as I was born to watch; and during the time it now wants of dawn
I will give a loose rein to my thoughts, and seek a vent for them in a
little madrigal which, unknown to thee, I composed in my head last
night.”

“I should think,” said Sancho, “that the thoughts that allow one to
make verses cannot be of great consequence; let your worship string
verses as much as you like and I’ll sleep as much as I can;” and
forthwith, taking the space of ground he required, he muffled himself
up and fell into a sound sleep, undisturbed by bond, debt, or trouble
of any sort. Don Quixote, propped up against the trunk of a beech or a
cork tree—for Cide Hamete does not specify what kind of tree it
was—sang in this strain to the accompaniment of his own sighs:

When in my mind
I muse, O Love, upon thy cruelty,
To death I flee,
In hope therein the end of all to find.

But drawing near
That welcome haven in my sea of woe,
Such joy I know,
That life revives, and still I linger here.

Thus life doth slay,
And death again to life restoreth me;
Strange destiny,
That deals with life and death as with a play!


He accompanied each verse with many sighs and not a few tears, just
like one whose heart was pierced with grief at his defeat and his
separation from Dulcinea.

And now daylight came, and the sun smote Sancho on the eyes with his
beams. He awoke, roused himself up, shook himself and stretched his
lazy limbs, and seeing the havoc the pigs had made with his stores he
cursed the drove, and more besides. Then the pair resumed their
journey, and as evening closed in they saw coming towards them some ten
men on horseback and four or five on foot. Don Quixote’s heart beat
quick and Sancho’s quailed with fear, for the persons approaching them
c