

“I say it,” he returned, “because those blows just now were more
because of the quarrel the devil stirred up between us both the other
night, than for what I said against my lady Dulcinea, whom I love and
reverence as I would a relic—though there is nothing of that about
her—merely as something belonging to your worship.”

“Say no more on that subject for thy life, Sancho,” said Don Quixote,
“for it is displeasing to me; I have already pardoned thee for that,
and thou knowest the common saying, ‘for a fresh sin a fresh penance.’”

While this was going on they saw coming along the road they were
following a man mounted on an ass, who when he came close seemed to be
a gipsy; but Sancho Panza, whose eyes and heart were there wherever he
saw asses, no sooner beheld the man than he knew him to be Gines de
Pasamonte; and by the thread of the gipsy he got at the ball, his ass,
for it was, in fact, Dapple that carried Pasamonte, who to escape
recognition and to sell the ass had disguised himself as a gipsy, being
able to speak the gipsy language, and many more, as well as if they
were his own. Sancho saw him and recognised him, and the instant he did
so he shouted to him, “Ginesillo, you thief, give up my treasure,
release my life, embarrass thyself not with my repose, quit my ass,
leave my delight, be off, rip, get thee gone, thief, and give up what
is not thine.”

There was no necessity for so many words or objurgations, for at the
first one Gines jumped down, and at a like racing speed made off and
got clear of them all. Sancho hastened to his Dapple, and embracing him
he said, “How hast thou fared, my blessing, Dapple of my eyes, my
comrade?” all the while kissing him and caressing him as if he were a
human being. The ass held his peace, and let himself be kissed and
caressed by Sancho without answering a single word. They all came up
and congratulated him on having found Dapple, Don Quixote especially,
who told him that notwithstanding this he would not cancel the order
for the three ass-colts, for which Sancho thanked him.

While the two had been going along conversing in this fashion, the
curate observed to Dorothea that she had shown great cleverness, as
well in the story itself as in its conciseness, and the resemblance it
bore to those of the books of chivalry. She said that she had many
times amused herself reading them; but that she did not know the
situation of the provinces or seaports, and so she had said at
haphazard that she had landed at Osuna.

“So I saw,” said the curate, “and for that reason I made haste to say
what I did, by which it was all set right. But is it not a strange
thing to see how readily this unhappy gentleman believes all these
figments and lies, simply because they are in the style and manner of
the absurdities of his books?”

“So it is,” said Cardenio; “and so uncommon and unexampled, that were
one to attempt to invent and concoct it in fiction, I doubt if there be
any wit keen enough to imagine it.”

“But another strange thing about it,” said the curate, “is that, apart
from the silly things which this worthy gentleman says in connection
with his craze, when other subjects are dealt with, he can discuss them
in a perfectly rational manner, showing that his mind is quite clear
and composed; so that, provided his chivalry is not touched upon, no
one would take him to be anything but a man of thoroughly sound
understanding.”

While they were holding this conversation Don Quixote continued his
with Sancho, saying:

“Friend Panza, let us forgive and forget as to our quarrels, and tell
me now, dismissing anger and irritation, where, how, and when didst
thou find Dulcinea? What was she doing? What didst thou say to her?
What did she answer? How did she look when she was reading my letter?
Who copied it out for thee? and everything in the matter that seems to
thee worth knowing, asking, and learning; neither adding nor falsifying
to