paring them one with another; for necessarily
one of those compared will be better than the other, and thou wilt be
hated by the one thou hast disparaged, and get nothing in any shape
from the one thou hast exalted.

“Thy attire shall be hose of full length, a long jerkin, and a cloak a
trifle longer; loose breeches by no means, for they are becoming
neither for gentlemen nor for governors.

“For the present, Sancho, this is all that has occurred to me to advise
thee; as time goes by and occasions arise my instructions shall follow,
if thou take care to let me know how thou art circumstanced.”

“Señor,” said Sancho, “I see well enough that all these things your
worship has said to me are good, holy, and profitable; but what use
will they be to me if I don’t remember one of them? To be sure that
about not letting my nails grow, and marrying again if I have the
chance, will not slip out of my head; but all that other hash, muddle,
and jumble—I don’t and can’t recollect any more of it than of last
year’s clouds; so it must be given me in writing; for though I can’t
either read or write, I’ll give it to my confessor, to drive it into me
and remind me of it whenever it is necessary.”

“Ah, sinner that I am!” said Don Quixote, “how bad it looks in
governors not to know how to read or write; for let me tell thee,
Sancho, when a man knows not how to read, or is left-handed, it argues
one of two things; either that he was the son of exceedingly mean and
lowly parents, or that he himself was so incorrigible and
ill-conditioned that neither good company nor good teaching could make
any impression on him. It is a great defect that thou labourest under,
and therefore I would have thee learn at any rate to sign thy name.”

“I can sign my name well enough,” said Sancho, “for when I was steward
of the brotherhood in my village I learned to make certain letters,
like the marks on bales of goods, which they told me made out my name.
Besides I can pretend my right hand is disabled and make someone else
sign for me, for ‘there’s a remedy for everything except death;’ and as
I shall be in command and hold the staff, I can do as I like; moreover,
‘he who has the alcalde for his father—,’ and I’ll be governor, and
that’s higher than alcalde. Only come and see! Let them make light of
me and abuse me; ‘they’ll come for wool and go back shorn;’ ‘whom God
loves, his house is known to Him;’ ‘the silly sayings of the rich pass
for saws in the world;’ and as I’ll be rich, being a governor, and at
the same time generous, as I mean to be, no fault will be seen in me.
‘Only make yourself honey and the flies will suck you;’ ‘as much as
thou hast so much art thou worth,’ as my grandmother used to say; and
‘thou canst have no revenge of a man of substance.’”

“Oh, God’s curse upon thee, Sancho!” here exclaimed Don Quixote; “sixty
thousand devils fly away with thee and thy proverbs! For the last hour
thou hast been stringing them together and inflicting the pangs of
torture on me with every one of them. Those proverbs will bring thee to
the gallows one day, I promise thee; thy subjects will take the
government from thee, or there will be revolts among them. Tell me,
where dost thou pick them up, thou booby? How dost thou apply them,
thou blockhead? For with me, to utter one and make it apply properly, I
have to sweat and labour as if I were digging.”

“By God, master mine,” said Sancho, “your worship is making a fuss
about very little. Why the devil should you be vexed if I make use of
what is my own? And I have got nothing else, nor any other stock in
trade except proverbs and more proverbs; and here are three just this
instant come into my head, pat to the purpose and like pears in a
basket; but I won’t repeat them, for ‘sage silence is called Sancho.’”

“That, Sancho, thou art not,” said Don Quixote; “for not only art thou
not sage silence, but thou art pestilent prate and perversity; still I
w