eper and niece, who were anxious to
hear by what arguments he was about to dissuade their master from going
to seek adventures. The arch wag Samson came forward, and embracing him
as he had done before, said with a loud voice, “O flower of
knight-errantry! O shining light of arms! O honour and mirror of the
Spanish nation! may God Almighty in his infinite power grant that any
person or persons, who would impede or hinder thy third sally, may find
no way out of the labyrinth of their schemes, nor ever accomplish what
they most desire!” And then, turning to the housekeeper, he said,
“Mistress housekeeper may just as well give over saying the prayer of
Santa Apollonia, for I know it is the positive determination of the
spheres that Señor Don Quixote shall proceed to put into execution his
new and lofty designs; and I should lay a heavy burden on my conscience
did I not urge and persuade this knight not to keep the might of his
strong arm and the virtue of his valiant spirit any longer curbed and
checked, for by his inactivity he is defrauding the world of the
redress of wrongs, of the protection of orphans, of the honour of
virgins, of the aid of widows, and of the support of wives, and other
matters of this kind appertaining, belonging, proper and peculiar to
the order of knight-errantry. On, then, my lord Don Quixote, beautiful
and brave, let your worship and highness set out to-day rather than
to-morrow; and if anything be needed for the execution of your purpose,
here am I ready in person and purse to supply the want; and were it
requisite to attend your magnificence as squire, I should esteem it the
happiest good fortune.”

At this, Don Quixote, turning to Sancho, said, “Did I not tell thee,
Sancho, there would be squires enough and to spare for me? See now who
offers to become one; no less than the illustrious bachelor Samson
Carrasco, the perpetual joy and delight of the courts of the Salamancan
schools, sound in body, discreet, patient under heat or cold, hunger or
thirst, with all the qualifications requisite to make a knight-errant’s
squire! But heaven forbid that, to gratify my own inclination, I should
shake or shatter this pillar of letters and vessel of the sciences, and
cut down this towering palm of the fair and liberal arts. Let this new
Samson remain in his own country, and, bringing honour to it, bring
honour at the same time on the grey heads of his venerable parents; for
I will be content with any squire that comes to hand, as Sancho does
not deign to accompany me.”

“I do deign,” said Sancho, deeply moved and with tears in his eyes; “it
shall not be said of me, master mine,” he continued, “‘the bread eaten
and the company dispersed.’ Nay, I come of no ungrateful stock, for all
the world knows, but particularly my own town, who the Panzas from whom
I am descended were; and, what is more, I know and have learned, by
many good words and deeds, your worship’s desire to show me favour; and
if I have been bargaining more or less about my wages, it was only to
please my wife, who, when she sets herself to press a point, no hammer
drives the hoops of a cask as she drives one to do what she wants; but,
after all, a man must be a man, and a woman a woman; and as I am a man
anyhow, which I can’t deny, I will be one in my own house too, let who
will take it amiss; and so there’s nothing more to do but for your
worship to make your will with its codicil in such a way that it can’t
be provoked, and let us set out at once, to save Señor Samson’s soul
from suffering, as he says his conscience obliges him to persuade your
worship to sally out upon the world a third time; so I offer again to
serve your worship faithfully and loyally, as well and better than all
the squires that served knights-errant in times past or present.”

The bachelor was filled with amazement when he heard Sancho’s
phraseology and style of talk, for though he had read the first part of
his mas