he capacity to govern his
realm.”

Sancho partly heard these last words of his master, and said to him,
“Strive hard you, Señor Don Quixote, to give me that county so often
promised by you and so long looked for by me, for I promise you there
will be no want of capacity in me to govern it; and even if there is, I
have heard say there are men in the world who farm seigniories, paying
so much a year, and they themselves taking charge of the government,
while the lord, with his legs stretched out, enjoys the revenue they
pay him, without troubling himself about anything else. That’s what
I’ll do, and not stand haggling over trifles, but wash my hands at once
of the whole business, and enjoy my rents like a duke, and let things
go their own way.”

“That, brother Sancho,” said the canon, “only holds good as far as the
enjoyment of the revenue goes; but the lord of the seigniory must
attend to the administration of justice, and here capacity and sound
judgment come in, and above all a firm determination to find out the
truth; for if this be wanting in the beginning, the middle and the end
will always go wrong; and God as commonly aids the honest intentions of
the simple as he frustrates the evil designs of the crafty.”

“I don’t understand those philosophies,” returned Sancho Panza; “all I
know is I would I had the county as soon as I shall know how to govern
it; for I have as much soul as another, and as much body as anyone, and
I shall be as much king of my realm as any other of his; and being so I
should do as I liked, and doing as I liked I should please myself, and
pleasing myself I should be content, and when one is content he has
nothing more to desire, and when one has nothing more to desire there
is an end of it; so let the county come, and God be with you, and let
us see one another, as one blind man said to the other.”

“That is not bad philosophy thou art talking, Sancho,” said the canon;
“but for all that there is a good deal to be said on this matter of
counties.”

To which Don Quixote returned, “I know not what more there is to be
said; I only guide myself by the example set me by the great Amadis of
Gaul, when he made his squire count of the Insula Firme; and so,
without any scruples of conscience, I can make a count of Sancho Panza,
for he is one of the best squires that ever knight-errant had.”

The canon was astonished at the methodical nonsense (if nonsense be
capable of method) that Don Quixote uttered, at the way in which he had
described the adventure of the knight of the lake, at the impression
that the deliberate lies of the books he read had made upon him, and
lastly he marvelled at the simplicity of Sancho, who desired so eagerly
to obtain the county his master had promised him.

By this time the canon’s servants, who had gone to the inn to fetch the
sumpter mule, had returned, and making a carpet and the green grass of
the meadow serve as a table, they seated themselves in the shade of
some trees and made their repast there, that the carter might not be
deprived of the advantage of the spot, as has been already said. As
they were eating they suddenly heard a loud noise and the sound of a
bell that seemed to come from among some brambles and thick bushes that
were close by, and the same instant they observed a beautiful goat,
spotted all over black, white, and brown, spring out of the thicket
with a goatherd after it, calling to it and uttering the usual cries to
make it stop or turn back to the fold. The fugitive goat, scared and
frightened, ran towards the company as if seeking their protection and
then stood still, and the goatherd coming up seized it by the horns and
began to talk to it as if it were possessed of reason and
understanding: “Ah wanderer, wanderer, Spotty, Spotty; how have you
gone limping all this time? What wolves have frightened you, my
daughter? Won’t you tell me what is the matter, my beauty? But what
else can it be e