 the faithful duenna I should have been, his
stale conceits would have never moved me, nor should I have been taken
in by such phrases as ‘in death I live,’ ‘in ice I burn,’ ‘in flames I
shiver,’ ‘hopeless I hope,’ ‘I go and stay,’ and paradoxes of that sort
which their writings are full of. And then when they promise the Phœnix
of Arabia, the crown of Ariadne, the horses of the Sun, the pearls of
the South, the gold of Tibar, and the balsam of Panchaia! Then it is
they give a loose to their pens, for it costs them little to make
promises they have no intention or power of fulfilling. But where am I
wandering to? Woe is me, unfortunate being! What madness or folly leads
me to speak of the faults of others, when there is so much to be said
about my own? Again, woe is me, hapless that I am! it was not verses
that conquered me, but my own simplicity; it was not music made me
yield, but my own imprudence; my own great ignorance and little caution
opened the way and cleared the path for Don Clavijo’s advances, for
that was the name of the gentleman I have referred to; and so, with my
help as go-between, he found his way many a time into the chamber of
the deceived Antonomasia (deceived not by him but by me) under the
title of a lawful husband; for, sinner though I was, I would not have
allowed him to approach the edge of her shoe-sole without being her
husband. No, no, not that; marriage must come first in any business of
this sort that I take in hand. But there was one hitch in this case,
which was that of inequality of rank, Don Clavijo being a private
gentleman, and the Princess Antonomasia, as I said, heiress to the
kingdom. The entanglement remained for some time a secret, kept hidden
by my cunning precautions, until I perceived that a certain expansion
of waist in Antonomasia must before long disclose it, the dread of
which made us all there take counsel together, and it was agreed that
before the mischief came to light, Don Clavijo should demand
Antonomasia as his wife before the Vicar, in virtue of an agreement to
marry him made by the princess, and drafted by my wit in such binding
terms that the might of Samson could not have broken it. The necessary
steps were taken; the Vicar saw the agreement, and took the lady’s
confession; she confessed everything in full, and he ordered her into
the custody of a very worthy alguacil of the court.”

“Are there alguacils of the court in Kandy, too,” said Sancho at this,
“and poets, and seguidillas? I swear I think the world is the same all
over! But make haste, Señora Trifaldi; for it is late, and I am dying
to know the end of this long story.”

“I will,” replied the countess.



p38e.jpg (22K)



CHAPTER XXXIX.
IN WHICH THE TRIFALDI CONTINUES HER MARVELLOUS AND MEMORABLE STORY




p39a.jpg (96K)

Full Size



By every word that Sancho uttered, the duchess was as much delighted as
Don Quixote was driven to desperation. He bade him hold his tongue, and
the Distressed One went on to say: “At length, after much questioning
and answering, as the princess held to her story, without changing or
varying her previous declaration, the Vicar gave his decision in favour
of Don Clavijo, and she was delivered over to him as his lawful wife;
which the Queen Doña Maguncia, the Princess Antonomasia’s mother, so
took to heart, that within the space of three days we buried her.”

“She died, no doubt,” said Sancho.

“Of course,” said Trifaldin; “they don’t bury living people in Kandy,
only the dead.”

“Señor Squire,” said Sancho, “a man in a swoon has been known to be
buried before now, in the belief that he was dead; and it struck me
that Queen Maguncia ought to have swooned rather than died; because
with life a great many things come right, and the princess’s folly was
not so great that she need feel it so keenly. If the lady had married
some page of hers, or some other servant of the house, as many another
has done, so I