heads and sceptres
in their hands appeared to be kings of some sort, whether real or mock
ones. By the side of this stage, which was reached by steps, were two
other chairs on which the men carrying the prisoners seated Don Quixote
and Sancho, all in silence, and by signs giving them to understand that
they too were to be silent; which, however, they would have been
without any signs, for their amazement at all they saw held them
tongue-tied. And now two persons of distinction, who were at once
recognised by Don Quixote as his hosts the duke and duchess, ascended
the stage attended by a numerous suite, and seated themselves on two
gorgeous chairs close to the two kings, as they seemed to be. Who would
not have been amazed at this? Nor was this all, for Don Quixote had
perceived that the dead body on the catafalque was that of the fair
Altisidora. As the duke and duchess mounted the stage Don Quixote and
Sancho rose and made them a profound obeisance, which they returned by
bowing their heads slightly. At this moment an official crossed over,
and approaching Sancho threw over him a robe of black buckram painted
all over with flames of fire, and taking off his cap put upon his head
a mitre such as those undergoing the sentence of the Holy Office wear;
and whispered in his ear that he must not open his lips, or they would
put a gag upon him, or take his life. Sancho surveyed himself from head
to foot and saw himself all ablaze with flames; but as they did not
burn him, he did not care two farthings for them. He took off the mitre
and seeing it painted with devils he put it on again, saying to
himself, “Well, so far those don’t burn me nor do these carry me off.”
Don Quixote surveyed him too, and though fear had got the better of his
faculties, he could not help smiling to see the figure Sancho
presented. And now from underneath the catafalque, so it seemed, there
rose a low sweet sound of flutes, which, coming unbroken by human voice
(for there silence itself kept silence), had a soft and languishing
effect. Then, beside the pillow of what seemed to be the dead body,
suddenly appeared a fair youth in a Roman habit, who, to the
accompaniment of a harp which he himself played, sang in a sweet and
clear voice these two stanzas:

While fair Altisidora, who the sport
    Of cold Don Quixote’s cruelty hath been,
Returns to life, and in this magic court
    The dames in sables come to grace the scene,
And while her matrons all in seemly sort
    My lady robes in baize and bombazine,
Her beauty and her sorrows will I sing
With defter quill than touched the Thracian string.

But not in life alone, methinks, to me
    Belongs the office; Lady, when my tongue
Is cold in death, believe me, unto thee
    My voice shall raise its tributary song.
My soul, from this strait prison-house set free,
    As o’er the Stygian lake it floats along,
Thy praises singing still shall hold its way,
And make the waters of oblivion stay.


At this point one of the two that looked like kings exclaimed, “Enough,
enough, divine singer! It would be an endless task to put before us now
the death and the charms of the peerless Altisidora, not dead as the
ignorant world imagines, but living in the voice of fame and in the
penance which Sancho Panza, here present, has to undergo to restore her
to the long-lost light. Do thou, therefore, O Rhadamanthus, who sittest
in judgment with me in the murky caverns of Dis, as thou knowest all
that the inscrutable fates have decreed touching the resuscitation of
this damsel, announce and declare it at once, that the happiness we
look forward to from her restoration be no longer deferred.”

No sooner had Minos the fellow judge of Rhadamanthus said this, than
Rhadamanthus rising up said:

“Ho, officials of this house, high and low, great and small, make haste
hither one and all, and print on Sancho’s face four-and-twenty smacks,
and give him twelve pinches and si