t-guard would be
down upon us. Nor did our expectation deceive us, for two hours had not
passed when, coming out of the brushwood into the open ground, we
perceived some fifty mounted men swiftly approaching us at a
hand-gallop. As soon as we saw them we stood still, waiting for them;
but as they came close and, instead of the Moors they were in quest of,
saw a set of poor Christians, they were taken aback, and one of them
asked if it could be we who were the cause of the shepherd having
raised the call to arms. I said “Yes,” and as I was about to explain to
him what had occurred, and whence we came and who we were, one of the
Christians of our party recognised the horseman who had put the
question to us, and before I could say anything more he exclaimed:

“Thanks be to God, sirs, for bringing us to such good quarters; for, if
I do not deceive myself, the ground we stand on is that of Velez Malaga
unless, indeed, all my years of captivity have made me unable to
recollect that you, señor, who ask who we are, are Pedro de Bustamante,
my uncle.”

The Christian captive had hardly uttered these words, when the horseman
threw himself off his horse, and ran to embrace the young man, crying:

“Nephew of my soul and life! I recognise thee now; and long have I
mourned thee as dead, I, and my sister, thy mother, and all thy kin
that are still alive, and whom God has been pleased to preserve that
they may enjoy the happiness of seeing thee. We knew long since that
thou wert in Algiers, and from the appearance of thy garments and those
of all this company, I conclude that ye have had a miraculous
restoration to liberty.”

“It is true,” replied the young man, “and by-and-by we will tell you
all.”

As soon as the horsemen understood that we were Christian captives,
they dismounted from their horses, and each offered his to carry us to
the city of Velez Malaga, which was a league and a half distant. Some
of them went to bring the boat to the city, we having told them where
we had left it; others took us up behind them, and Zoraida was placed
on the horse of the young man’s uncle. The whole town came out to meet
us, for they had by this time heard of our arrival from one who had
gone on in advance. They were not astonished to see liberated captives
or captive Moors, for people on that coast are well used to see both
one and the other; but they were astonished at the beauty of Zoraida,
which was just then heightened, as well by the exertion of travelling
as by joy at finding herself on Christian soil, and relieved of all
fear of being lost; for this had brought such a glow upon her face,
that unless my affection for her were deceiving me, I would venture to
say that there was not a more beautiful creature in the world—at least,
that I had ever seen. We went straight to the church to return thanks
to God for the mercies we had received, and when Zoraida entered it she
said there were faces there like Lela Marien’s. We told her they were
her images; and as well as he could the renegade explained to her what
they meant, that she might adore them as if each of them were the very
same Lela Marien that had spoken to her; and she, having great
intelligence and a quick and clear instinct, understood at once all he
said to her about them. Thence they took us away and distributed us all
in different houses in the town; but as for the renegade, Zoraida, and
myself, the Christian who came with us brought us to the house of his
parents, who had a fair share of the gifts of fortune, and treated us
with as much kindness as they did their own son.

We remained six days in Velez, at the end of which the renegade, having
informed himself of all that was requisite for him to do, set out for
the city of Granada to restore himself to the sacred bosom of the
Church through the medium of the Holy Inquisition. The other released
captives took their departures, each the way that seemed best to him,
and Z