t
is not permitted to me to say more, God be with thee; for I return to
that place I wot of;” and as he brought the prophecy to a close he
raised his voice to a high pitch, and then lowered it to such a soft
tone, that even those who knew it was all a joke were almost inclined
to take what they heard seriously.

Don Quixote was comforted by the prophecy he heard, for he at once
comprehended its meaning perfectly, and perceived it was promised to
him that he should see himself united in holy and lawful matrimony with
his beloved Dulcinea del Toboso, from whose blessed womb should proceed
the whelps, his sons, to the eternal glory of La Mancha; and being
thoroughly and firmly persuaded of this, he lifted up his voice, and
with a deep sigh exclaimed, “Oh thou, whoever thou art, who hast
foretold me so much good, I implore of thee that on my part thou
entreat that sage enchanter who takes charge of my interests, that he
leave me not to perish in this captivity in which they are now carrying
me away, ere I see fulfilled promises so joyful and incomparable as
those which have been now made me; for, let this but come to pass, and
I shall glory in the pains of my prison, find comfort in these chains
wherewith they bind me, and regard this bed whereon they stretch me,
not as a hard battle-field, but as a soft and happy nuptial couch; and
touching the consolation of Sancho Panza, my squire, I rely upon his
goodness and rectitude that he will not desert me in good or evil
fortune; for if, by his ill luck or mine, it may not happen to be in my
power to give him the island I have promised, or any equivalent for it,
at least his wages shall not be lost; for in my will, which is already
made, I have declared the sum that shall be paid to him, measured, not
by his many faithful services, but by the means at my disposal.”

Sancho bowed his head very respectfully and kissed both his hands, for,
being tied together, he could not kiss one; and then the apparitions
lifted the cage upon their shoulders and fixed it upon the ox-cart.



c46e.jpg (56K)

Full Size



CHAPTER XLVII.
OF THE STRANGE MANNER IN WHICH DON QUIXOTE OF LA MANCHA WAS CARRIED
AWAY ENCHANTED, TOGETHER WITH OTHER REMARKABLE INCIDENTS




c47a.jpg (181K)

Full Size




When Don Quixote saw himself caged and hoisted on the cart in this way,
he said, “Many grave histories of knights-errant have I read; but never
yet have I read, seen, or heard of their carrying off enchanted
knights-errant in this fashion, or at the slow pace that these lazy,
sluggish animals promise; for they always take them away through the
air with marvellous swiftness, enveloped in a dark thick cloud, or on a
chariot of fire, or it may be on some hippogriff or other beast of the
kind; but to carry me off like this on an ox-cart! By God, it puzzles
me! But perhaps the chivalry and enchantments of our day take a
different course from that of those in days gone by; and it may be,
too, that as I am a new knight in the world, and the first to revive
the already forgotten calling of knight-adventurers, they may have
newly invented other kinds of enchantments and other modes of carrying
off the enchanted. What thinkest thou of the matter, Sancho my son?”



c47b.jpg (357K)

Full Size




“I don’t know what to think,” answered Sancho, “not being as well read
as your worship in errant writings; but for all that I venture to say
and swear that these apparitions that are about us are not quite
catholic.”

“Catholic!” said Don Quixote. “Father of me! how can they be Catholic
when they are all devils that have taken fantastic shapes to come and
do this, and bring me to this condition? And if thou wouldst prove it,
touch them, and feel them, and thou wilt find they have only bodies of
air, and no consistency except in appearance.”

“By God, master,” returned Sancho, “I have touched them already; and
that devil, that goes about there so