 the happiness thou givest me in accepting me as thine, or to
suppress the pain that is rapidly drawing the dread shadow of death
over my eyes? What I entreat of thee, O thou fatal star to me, is that
the hand thou demandest of me and wouldst give me, be not given out of
complaisance or to deceive me afresh, but that thou confess and declare
that without any constraint upon thy will thou givest it to me as to
thy lawful husband; for it is not meet that thou shouldst trifle with
me at such a moment as this, or have recourse to falsehoods with one
who has dealt so truly by thee.”

While uttering these words he showed such weakness that the bystanders
expected each return of faintness would take his life with it. Then
Quiteria, overcome with modesty and shame, holding in her right hand
the hand of Basilio, said, “No force would bend my will; as freely,
therefore, as it is possible for me to do so, I give thee the hand of a
lawful wife, and take thine if thou givest it to me of thine own free
will, untroubled and unaffected by the calamity thy hasty act has
brought upon thee.”

“Yes, I give it,” said Basilio, “not agitated or distracted, but with
unclouded reason that heaven is pleased to grant me, thus do I give
myself to be thy husband.”

“And I give myself to be thy wife,” said Quiteria, “whether thou livest
many years, or they carry thee from my arms to the grave.”

“For one so badly wounded,” observed Sancho at this point, “this young
man has a great deal to say; they should make him leave off billing and
cooing, and attend to his soul; for to my thinking he has it more on
his tongue than at his teeth.”

Basilio and Quiteria having thus joined hands, the priest, deeply moved
and with tears in his eyes, pronounced the blessing upon them, and
implored heaven to grant an easy passage to the soul of the newly
wedded man, who, the instant he received the blessing, started nimbly
to his feet and with unparalleled effrontery pulled out the rapier that
had been sheathed in his body. All the bystanders were astounded, and
some, more simple than inquiring, began shouting, “A miracle, a
miracle!” But Basilio replied, “No miracle, no miracle; only a trick, a
trick!” The priest, perplexed and amazed, made haste to examine the
wound with both hands, and found that the blade had passed, not through
Basilio’s flesh and ribs, but through a hollow iron tube full of blood,
which he had adroitly fixed at the place, the blood, as was afterwards
ascertained, having been so prepared as not to congeal. In short, the
priest and Camacho and most of those present saw they were tricked and
made fools of. The bride showed no signs of displeasure at the
deception; on the contrary, hearing them say that the marriage, being
fraudulent, would not be valid, she said that she confirmed it afresh,
whence they all concluded that the affair had been planned by agreement
and understanding between the pair, whereat Camacho and his supporters
were so mortified that they proceeded to revenge themselves by
violence, and a great number of them drawing their swords attacked
Basilio, in whose protection as many more swords were in an instant
unsheathed, while Don Quixote taking the lead on horseback, with his
lance over his arm and well covered with his shield, made all give way
before him. Sancho, who never found any pleasure or enjoyment in such
doings, retreated to the wine-jars from which he had taken his
delectable skimmings, considering that, as a holy place, that spot
would be respected.

“Hold, sirs, hold!” cried Don Quixote in a loud voice; “we have no
right to take vengeance for wrongs that love may do to us: remember
love and war are the same thing, and as in war it is allowable and
common to make use of wiles and stratagems to overcome the enemy, so in
the contests and rivalries of love the tricks and devices employed to
attain the desired end are justifiable, provided they be not to the
discre