ng of
the other, ran to look, fancying the ass had turned up at last. When
they came in sight of one another, said the loser, ‘Is it possible,
gossip, that it was not my ass that brayed?’ ‘No, it was I,’ said the
other. ‘Well then, I can tell you, gossip,’ said the ass’s owner, ‘that
between you and an ass there is not an atom of difference as far as
braying goes, for I never in all my life saw or heard anything more
natural.’ ‘Those praises and compliments belong to you more justly than
to me, gossip,’ said the inventor of the plan; ‘for, by the God that
made me, you might give a couple of brays odds to the best and most
finished brayer in the world; the tone you have got is deep, your voice
is well kept up as to time and pitch, and your finishing notes come
thick and fast; in fact, I own myself beaten, and yield the palm to
you, and give in to you in this rare accomplishment.’ ‘Well then,’ said
the owner, ‘I’ll set a higher value on myself for the future, and
consider that I know something, as I have an excellence of some sort;
for though I always thought I brayed well, I never supposed I came up
to the pitch of perfection you say.’ ‘And I say too,’ said the second,
‘that there are rare gifts going to loss in the world, and that they
are ill bestowed upon those who don’t know how to make use of them.’
‘Ours,’ said the owner of the ass, ‘unless it is in cases like this we
have now in hand, cannot be of any service to us, and even in this God
grant they may be of some use.’ So saying they separated, and took to
their braying once more, but every instant they were deceiving one
another, and coming to meet one another again, until they arranged by
way of countersign, so as to know that it was they and not the ass, to
give two brays, one after the other. In this way, doubling the brays at
every step, they made the complete circuit of the forest, but the lost
ass never gave them an answer or even the sign of one. How could the
poor ill-starred brute have answered, when, in the thickest part of the
forest, they found him devoured by wolves? As soon as he saw him his
owner said, ‘I was wondering he did not answer, for if he wasn’t dead
he’d have brayed when he heard us, or he’d have been no ass; but for
the sake of having heard you bray to such perfection, gossip, I count
the trouble I have taken to look for him well bestowed, even though I
have found him dead.’ ‘It’s in a good hand, gossip,’ said the other;
‘if the abbot sings well, the acolyte is not much behind him.’ So they
returned disconsolate and hoarse to their village, where they told
their friends, neighbours, and acquaintances what had befallen them in
their search for the ass, each crying up the other’s perfection in
braying. The whole story came to be known and spread abroad through the
villages of the neighbourhood; and the devil, who never sleeps, with
his love for sowing dissensions and scattering discord everywhere,
blowing mischief about and making quarrels out of nothing, contrived to
make the people of the other towns fall to braying whenever they saw
anyone from our village, as if to throw the braying of our regidors in
our teeth. Then the boys took to it, which was the same thing for it as
getting into the hands and mouths of all the devils of hell; and
braying spread from one town to another in such a way that the men of
the braying town are as easy to be known as blacks are to be known from
whites, and the unlucky joke has gone so far that several times the
scoffed have come out in arms and in a body to do battle with the
scoffers, and neither king nor rook, fear nor shame, can mend matters.
To-morrow or the day after, I believe, the men of my town, that is, of
the braying town, are going to take the field against another village
two leagues away from ours, one of those that persecute us most; and
that we may turn out well prepared I have bought these lances and
halberds you have seen. These are the cur