are to be always interfering with me, and that you are to be always
offending and I always pardoning? Don’t fancy it, impious scoundrel,
for that beyond a doubt thou art, since thou hast set thy tongue going
against the peerless Dulcinea. Know you not, lout, vagabond, beggar,
that were it not for the might that she infuses into my arm I should
not have strength enough to kill a flea? Say, scoffer with a viper’s
tongue, what think you has won this kingdom and cut off this giant’s
head and made you a marquis (for all this I count as already
accomplished and decided), but the might of Dulcinea, employing my arm
as the instrument of her achievements? She fights in me and conquers in
me, and I live and breathe in her, and owe my life and being to her. O
whoreson scoundrel, how ungrateful you are, you see yourself raised
from the dust of the earth to be a titled lord, and the return you make
for so great a benefit is to speak evil of her who has conferred it
upon you!”

Sancho was not so stunned but that he heard all his master said, and
rising with some degree of nimbleness he ran to place himself behind
Dorothea’s palfrey, and from that position he said to his master:

“Tell me, señor; if your worship is resolved not to marry this great
princess, it is plain the kingdom will not be yours; and not being so,
how can you bestow favours upon me? That is what I complain of. Let
your worship at any rate marry this queen, now that we have got her
here as if showered down from heaven, and afterwards you may go back to
my lady Dulcinea; for there must have been kings in the world who kept
mistresses. As to beauty, I have nothing to do with it; and if the
truth is to be told, I like them both; though I have never seen the
lady Dulcinea.”

“How! never seen her, blasphemous traitor!” exclaimed Don Quixote;
“hast thou not just now brought me a message from her?”

“I mean,” said Sancho, “that I did not see her so much at my leisure
that I could take particular notice of her beauty, or of her charms
piecemeal; but taken in the lump I like her.”

“Now I forgive thee,” said Don Quixote; “and do thou forgive me the
injury I have done thee; for our first impulses are not in our
control.”

“That I see,” replied Sancho, “and with me the wish to speak is always
the first impulse, and I cannot help saying, once at any rate, what I
have on the tip of my tongue.”

“For all that, Sancho,” said Don Quixote, “take heed of what thou
sayest, for the pitcher goes so often to the well—I need say no more to
thee.”

“Well, well,” said Sancho, “God is in heaven, and sees all tricks, and
will judge who does most harm, I in not speaking right, or your worship
in not doing it.”

“That is enough,” said Dorothea; “run, Sancho, and kiss your lord’s
hand and beg his pardon, and henceforward be more circumspect with your
praise and abuse; and say nothing in disparagement of that lady Toboso,
of whom I know nothing save that I am her servant; and put your trust
in God, for you will not fail to obtain some dignity so as to live like
a prince.”

Sancho advanced hanging his head and begged his master’s hand, which
Don Quixote with dignity presented to him, giving him his blessing as
soon as he had kissed it; he then bade him go on ahead a little, as he
had questions to ask him and matters of great importance to discuss
with him. Sancho obeyed, and when the two had gone some distance in
advance Don Quixote said to him, “Since thy return I have had no
opportunity or time to ask thee many particulars touching thy mission
and the answer thou hast brought back, and now that chance has granted
us the time and opportunity, deny me not the happiness thou canst give
me by such good news.”

“Let your worship ask what you will,” answered Sancho, “for I shall
find a way out of all as I found a way in; but I implore you, señor,
not to be so revengeful in future.”

“Why dost thou say that, Sancho?” said Don Quixote.