madman than a knight.”

“There’s why they say that ‘covetousness bursts the bag,’” said he of
the Grove; “but if you come to talk of that sort, there is not a
greater one in the world than my master, for he is one of those of whom
they say, ‘the cares of others kill the ass;’ for, in order that
another knight may recover the senses he has lost, he makes a madman of
himself and goes looking for what, when found, may, for all I know, fly
in his own face.” “And is he in love perchance?” asked Sancho.

“He is,” said of the Grove, “with one Casildea de Vandalia, the rawest
and best roasted lady the whole world could produce; but that rawness
is not the only foot he limps on, for he has greater schemes rumbling
in his bowels, as will be seen before many hours are over.”

“There’s no road so smooth but it has some hole or hindrance in it,”
said Sancho; “in other houses they cook beans, but in mine it’s by the
potful; madness will have more followers and hangers-on than sound
sense; but if there be any truth in the common saying, that to have
companions in trouble gives some relief, I may take consolation from
you, inasmuch as you serve a master as crazy as my own.”

“Crazy but valiant,” replied he of the Grove, “and more roguish than
crazy or valiant.”

“Mine is not that,” said Sancho; “I mean he has nothing of the rogue in
him; on the contrary, he has the soul of a pitcher; he has no thought
of doing harm to anyone, only good to all, nor has he any malice
whatever in him; a child might persuade him that it is night at
noonday; and for this simplicity I love him as the core of my heart,
and I can’t bring myself to leave him, let him do ever such foolish
things.”

“For all that, brother and señor,” said he of the Grove, “if the blind
lead the blind, both are in danger of falling into the pit. It is
better for us to beat a quiet retreat and get back to our own quarters;
for those who seek adventures don’t always find good ones.”

Sancho kept spitting from time to time, and his spittle seemed somewhat
ropy and dry, observing which the compassionate squire of the Grove
said, “It seems to me that with all this talk of ours our tongues are
sticking to the roofs of our mouths; but I have a pretty good loosener
hanging from the saddle-bow of my horse,” and getting up he came back
the next minute with a large bota of wine and a pasty half a yard
across; and this is no exaggeration, for it was made of a house rabbit
so big that Sancho, as he handled it, took it to be made of a goat, not
to say a kid, and looking at it he said, “And do you carry this with
you, señor?”

“Why, what are you thinking about?” said the other; “do you take me for
some paltry squire? I carry a better larder on my horse’s croup than a
general takes with him when he goes on a march.”

Sancho ate without requiring to be pressed, and in the dark bolted
mouthfuls like the knots on a tether, and said he, “You are a proper
trusty squire, one of the right sort, sumptuous and grand, as this
banquet shows, which, if it has not come here by magic art, at any rate
has the look of it; not like me, unlucky beggar, that have nothing more
in my alforjas than a scrap of cheese, so hard that one might brain a
giant with it, and, to keep it company, a few dozen carobs and as many
more filberts and walnuts; thanks to the austerity of my master, and
the idea he has and the rule he follows, that knights-errant must not
live or sustain themselves on anything except dried fruits and the
herbs of the field.”

“By my faith, brother,” said he of the Grove, “my stomach is not made
for thistles, or wild pears, or roots of the woods; let our masters do
as they like, with their chivalry notions and laws, and eat what those
enjoin; I carry my prog-basket and this bota hanging to the saddle-bow,
whatever they may say; and it is such an object of worship with me, and
I love it so, that there is hardly a moment but I am kissing and
e