mmelled, said to him, “Brother devil (for it is impossible but that
thou must be one since thou hast had might and strength enough to
overcome mine), I ask thee to agree to a truce for but one hour for the
solemn note of yonder trumpet that falls on our ears seems to me to
summon me to some new adventure.” The goatherd, who was by this time
tired of pummelling and being pummelled, released him at once, and Don
Quixote rising to his feet and turning his eyes to the quarter where
the sound had been heard, suddenly saw coming down the slope of a hill
several men clad in white like penitents.

The fact was that the clouds had that year withheld their moisture from
the earth, and in all the villages of the district they were organising
processions, rogations, and penances, imploring God to open the hands
of his mercy and send the rain; and to this end the people of a village
that was hard by were going in procession to a holy hermitage there was
on one side of that valley. Don Quixote when he saw the strange garb of
the penitents, without reflecting how often he had seen it before, took
it into his head that this was a case of adventure, and that it fell to
him alone as a knight-errant to engage in it; and he was all the more
confirmed in this notion, by the idea that an image draped in black
they had with them was some illustrious lady that these villains and
discourteous thieves were carrying off by force. As soon as this
occurred to him he ran with all speed to Rocinante who was grazing at
large, and taking the bridle and the buckler from the saddle-bow, he
had him bridled in an instant, and calling to Sancho for his sword he
mounted Rocinante, braced his buckler on his arm, and in a loud voice
exclaimed to those who stood by, “Now, noble company, ye shall see how
important it is that there should be knights in the world professing
the order of knight-errantry; now, I say, ye shall see, by the
deliverance of that worthy lady who is borne captive there, whether
knights-errant deserve to be held in estimation,” and so saying he
brought his legs to bear on Rocinante—for he had no spurs—and at a full
canter (for in all this veracious history we never read of Rocinante
fairly galloping) set off to encounter the penitents, though the
curate, the canon, and the barber ran to prevent him. But it was out of
their power, nor did he even stop for the shouts of Sancho calling
after him, “Where are you going, Señor Don Quixote? What devils have
possessed you to set you on against our Catholic faith? Plague take me!
mind, that is a procession of penitents, and the lady they are carrying
on that stand there is the blessed image of the immaculate Virgin. Take
care what you are doing, señor, for this time it may be safely said you
don’t know what you are about.” Sancho laboured in vain, for his master
was so bent on coming to quarters with these sheeted figures and
releasing the lady in black that he did not hear a word; and even had
he heard, he would not have turned back if the king had ordered him. He
came up with the procession and reined in Rocinante, who was already
anxious enough to slacken speed a little, and in a hoarse, excited
voice he exclaimed, “You who hide your faces, perhaps because you are
not good subjects, pay attention and listen to what I am about to say
to you.” The first to halt were those who were carrying the image, and
one of the four ecclesiastics who were chanting the Litany, struck by
the strange figure of Don Quixote, the leanness of Rocinante, and the
other ludicrous peculiarities he observed, said in reply to him,
“Brother, if you have anything to say to us say it quickly, for these
brethren are whipping themselves, and we cannot stop, nor is it
reasonable we should stop to hear anything, unless indeed it is short
enough to be said in two words.”

“I will say it in one,” replied Don Quixote, “and it is this; that at
once, this very instant, ye release that