d much pressing before she would go to summon Lothario,
but at last she went, and while awaiting her return Camilla continued,
as if speaking to herself, “Good God! would it not have been more
prudent to have repulsed Lothario, as I have done many a time before,
than to allow him, as I am now doing, to think me unchaste and vile,
even for the short time I must wait until I undeceive him? No doubt it
would have been better; but I should not be avenged, nor the honour of
my husband vindicated, should he find so clear and easy an escape from
the strait into which his depravity has led him. Let the traitor pay
with his life for the temerity of his wanton wishes, and let the world
know (if haply it shall ever come to know) that Camilla not only
preserved her allegiance to her husband, but avenged him of the man who
dared to wrong him. Still, I think it might be better to disclose this
to Anselmo. But then I have called his attention to it in the letter I
wrote to him in the country, and, if he did nothing to prevent the
mischief I there pointed out to him, I suppose it was that from pure
goodness of heart and trustfulness he would not and could not believe
that any thought against his honour could harbour in the breast of so
stanch a friend; nor indeed did I myself believe it for many days, nor
should I have ever believed it if his insolence had not gone so far as
to make it manifest by open presents, lavish promises, and ceaseless
tears. But why do I argue thus? Does a bold determination stand in need
of arguments? Surely not. Then traitors avaunt! Vengeance to my aid!
Let the false one come, approach, advance, die, yield up his life, and
then befall what may. Pure I came to him whom Heaven bestowed upon me,
pure I shall leave him; and at the worst bathed in my own chaste blood
and in the foul blood of the falsest friend that friendship ever saw in
the world;” and as she uttered these words she paced the room holding
the unsheathed dagger, with such irregular and disordered steps, and
such gestures that one would have supposed her to have lost her senses,
and taken her for some violent desperado instead of a delicate woman.

Anselmo, concealed behind some tapestries where he had hidden himself,
beheld and was amazed at all, and already felt that what he had seen
and heard was a sufficient answer to even greater suspicions; and he
would have been now well pleased if the proof afforded by Lothario’s
coming were dispensed with, as he feared some sudden mishap; but as he
was on the point of showing himself and coming forth to embrace and
undeceive his wife he paused as he saw Leonela returning, leading
Lothario. Camilla when she saw him, drawing a long line in front of her
on the floor with the dagger, said to him, “Lothario, pay attention to
what I say to thee: if by any chance thou darest to cross this line
thou seest, or even approach it, the instant I see thee attempt it that
same instant will I pierce my bosom with this dagger that I hold in my
hand; and before thou answerest me a word I desire thee to listen to a
few from me, and afterwards thou shalt reply as may please thee. First,
I desire thee to tell me, Lothario, if thou knowest my husband Anselmo,
and in what light thou regardest him; and secondly I desire to know if
thou knowest me too. Answer me this, without embarrassment or
reflecting deeply what thou wilt answer, for they are no riddles I put
to thee.”

Lothario was not so dull but that from the first moment when Camilla
directed him to make Anselmo hide himself he understood what she
intended to do, and therefore he fell in with her idea so readily and
promptly that between them they made the imposture look more true than
truth; so he answered her thus: “I did not think, fair Camilla, that
thou wert calling me to ask questions so remote from the object with
which I come; but if it is to defer the promised reward thou art doing
so, thou mightst have put it of