xamined him, he said to him:

“If you have anything to give me to eat, for God’s sake give it me, and
after I have eaten I will do all you ask in acknowledgment of the
goodwill you have displayed towards me.”

Sancho from his sack, and the goatherd from his pouch, furnished the
Ragged One with the means of appeasing his hunger, and what they gave
him he ate like a half-witted being, so hastily that he took no time
between mouthfuls, gorging rather than swallowing; and while he ate
neither he nor they who observed him uttered a word. As soon as he had
done he made signs to them to follow him, which they did, and he led
them to a green plot which lay a little farther off round the corner of
a rock. On reaching it he stretched himself upon the grass, and the
others did the same, all keeping silence, until the Ragged One,
settling himself in his place, said:

“If it is your wish, sirs, that I should disclose in a few words the
surpassing extent of my misfortunes, you must promise not to break the
thread of my sad story with any question or other interruption, for the
instant you do so the tale I tell will come to an end.”

These words of the Ragged One reminded Don Quixote of the tale his
squire had told him, when he failed to keep count of the goats that had
crossed the river and the story remained unfinished; but to return to
the Ragged One, he went on to say:

“I give you this warning because I wish to pass briefly over the story
of my misfortunes, for recalling them to memory only serves to add
fresh ones, and the less you question me the sooner shall I make an end
of the recital, though I shall not omit to relate anything of
importance in order fully to satisfy your curiosity.”

Don Quixote gave the promise for himself and the others, and with this
assurance he began as follows:

“My name is Cardenio, my birthplace one of the best cities of this
Andalusia, my family noble, my parents rich, my misfortune so great
that my parents must have wept and my family grieved over it without
being able by their wealth to lighten it; for the gifts of fortune can
do little to relieve reverses sent by Heaven. In that same country
there was a heaven in which love had placed all the glory I could
desire; such was the beauty of Luscinda, a damsel as noble and as rich
as I, but of happier fortunes, and of less firmness than was due to so
worthy a passion as mine. This Luscinda I loved, worshipped, and adored
from my earliest and tenderest years, and she loved me in all the
innocence and sincerity of childhood. Our parents were aware of our
feelings, and were not sorry to perceive them, for they saw clearly
that as they ripened they must lead at last to a marriage between us, a
thing that seemed almost prearranged by the equality of our families
and wealth. We grew up, and with our growth grew the love between us,
so that the father of Luscinda felt bound for propriety’s sake to
refuse me admission to his house, in this perhaps imitating the parents
of that Thisbe so celebrated by the poets, and this refusal but added
love to love and flame to flame; for though they enforced silence upon
our tongues they could not impose it upon our pens, which can make
known the heart’s secrets to a loved one more freely than tongues; for
many a time the presence of the object of love shakes the firmest will
and strikes dumb the boldest tongue. Ah heavens! how many letters did I
write her, and how many dainty modest replies did I receive! how many
ditties and love-songs did I compose in which my heart declared and
made known its feelings, described its ardent longings, revelled in its
recollections and dallied with its desires! At length growing impatient
and feeling my heart languishing with longing to see her, I resolved to
put into execution and carry out what seemed to me the best mode of
winning my desired and merited reward, to ask her of her father for my
lawful wife, which I did. To this 