ote; “It will be wise to let
the malign influence of the stars which now prevails pass off.”

The canon, the curate, and the barber told him he would act very wisely
in doing as he said; and so, highly amused at Sancho Panza’s
simplicities, they placed Don Quixote in the cart as before. The
procession once more formed itself in order and proceeded on its road;
the goatherd took his leave of the party; the officers of the
Brotherhood declined to go any farther, and the curate paid them what
was due to them; the canon begged the curate to let him know how Don
Quixote did, whether he was cured of his madness or still suffered from
it, and then begged leave to continue his journey; in short, they all
separated and went their ways, leaving to themselves the curate and the
barber, Don Quixote, Sancho Panza, and the good Rocinante, who regarded
everything with as great resignation as his master. The carter yoked
his oxen and made Don Quixote comfortable on a truss of hay, and at his
usual deliberate pace took the road the curate directed, and at the end
of six days they reached Don Quixote’s village, and entered it about
the middle of the day, which it so happened was a Sunday, and the
people were all in the plaza, through which Don Quixote’s cart passed.
They all flocked to see what was in the cart, and when they recognised
their townsman they were filled with amazement, and a boy ran off to
bring the news to his housekeeper and his niece that their master and
uncle had come back all lean and yellow and stretched on a truss of hay
on an ox-cart. It was piteous to hear the cries the two good ladies
raised, how they beat their breasts and poured out fresh maledictions
on those accursed books of chivalry; all which was renewed when they
saw Don Quixote coming in at the gate.

At the news of Don Quixote’s arrival Sancho Panza’s wife came running,
for she by this time knew that her husband had gone away with him as
his squire, and on seeing Sancho, the first thing she asked him was if
the ass was well. Sancho replied that he was, better than his master
was.

“Thanks be to God,” said she, “for being so good to me; but now tell
me, my friend, what have you made by your squirings? What gown have you
brought me back? What shoes for your children?”

“I bring nothing of that sort, wife,” said Sancho; “though I bring
other things of more consequence and value.”

“I am very glad of that,” returned his wife; “show me these things of
more value and consequence, my friend; for I want to see them to cheer
my heart that has been so sad and heavy all these ages that you have
been away.”

“I will show them to you at home, wife,” said Sancho; “be content for
the present; for if it please God that we should again go on our
travels in search of adventures, you will soon see me a count, or
governor of an island, and that not one of those everyday ones, but the
best that is to be had.”

“Heaven grant it, husband,” said she, “for indeed we have need of it.
But tell me, what’s this about islands, for I don’t understand it?”

“Honey is not for the mouth of the ass,” returned Sancho; “all in good
time thou shalt see, wife—nay, thou wilt be surprised to hear thyself
called ‘your ladyship’ by all thy vassals.”

“What are you talking about, Sancho, with your ladyships, islands, and
vassals?” returned Teresa Panza—for so Sancho’s wife was called, though
they were not relations, for in La Mancha it is customary for wives to
take their husbands’ surnames.

“Don’t be in such a hurry to know all this, Teresa,” said Sancho; “it
is enough that I am telling you the truth, so shut your mouth. But I
may tell you this much by the way, that there is nothing in the world
more delightful than to be a person of consideration, squire to a
knight-errant, and a seeker of adventures. To be sure most of those one
finds do not end as pleasantly as one could wish, for out of a hundred,
ninety-nine will turn out cros