tiate said he would get him a cousin of his
own, a famous scholar, and one very much given to reading books of
chivalry, who would have great pleasure in conducting him to the mouth
of the very cave, and would show him the lakes of Ruidera, which were
likewise famous all over La Mancha, and even all over Spain; and he
assured him he would find him entertaining, for he was a youth who
could write books good enough to be printed and dedicated to princes.
The cousin arrived at last, leading an ass in foal, with a pack-saddle
covered with a parti-coloured carpet or sackcloth; Sancho saddled
Rocinante, got Dapple ready, and stocked his alforjas, along with which
went those of the cousin, likewise well filled; and so, commending
themselves to God and bidding farewell to all, they set out, taking the
road for the famous cave of Montesinos.

On the way Don Quixote asked the cousin of what sort and character his
pursuits, avocations, and studies were, to which he replied that he was
by profession a humanist, and that his pursuits and studies were making
books for the press, all of great utility and no less entertainment to
the nation. One was called “The Book of Liveries,” in which he
described seven hundred and three liveries, with their colours,
mottoes, and ciphers, from which gentlemen of the court might pick and
choose any they fancied for festivals and revels, without having to go
a-begging for them from anyone, or puzzling their brains, as the saying
is, to have them appropriate to their objects and purposes; “for,” said
he, “I give the jealous, the rejected, the forgotten, the absent, what
will suit them, and fit them without fail. I have another book, too,
which I shall call ‘Metamorphoses, or the Spanish Ovid,’ one of rare
and original invention, for imitating Ovid in burlesque style, I show
in it who the Giralda of Seville and the Angel of the Magdalena were,
what the sewer of Vecinguerra at Cordova was, what the bulls of
Guisando, the Sierra Morena, the Leganitos and Lavapies fountains at
Madrid, not forgetting those of the Piojo, of the Cano Dorado, and of
the Priora; and all with their allegories, metaphors, and changes, so
that they are amusing, interesting, and instructive, all at once.
Another book I have which I call ‘The Supplement to Polydore Vergil,’
which treats of the invention of things, and is a work of great
erudition and research, for I establish and elucidate elegantly some
things of great importance which Polydore omitted to mention. He forgot
to tell us who was the first man in the world that had a cold in his
head, and who was the first to try salivation for the French disease,
but I give it accurately set forth, and quote more than five-and-twenty
authors in proof of it, so you may perceive I have laboured to good
purpose and that the book will be of service to the whole world.”

Sancho, who had been very attentive to the cousin’s words, said to him,
“Tell me, señor—and God give you luck in printing your books—can you
tell me (for of course you know, as you know everything) who was the
first man that scratched his head? For to my thinking it must have been
our father Adam.”

“So it must,” replied the cousin; “for there is no doubt but Adam had a
head and hair; and being the first man in the world he would have
scratched himself sometimes.”

“So I think,” said Sancho; “but now tell me, who was the first tumbler
in the world?”

“Really, brother,” answered the cousin, “I could not at this moment say
positively without having investigated it; I will look it up when I go
back to where I have my books, and will satisfy you the next time we
meet, for this will not be the last time.”

“Look here, señor,” said Sancho, “don’t give yourself any trouble about
it, for I have just this minute hit upon what I asked you. The first
tumbler in the world, you must know, was Lucifer, when they cast or
pitched him out of heaven; for he came tumbling into the bo