 But even when better informed they seem to
have no apprehension of the full force of the discrepancy. Take, for
instance, Gustave Doré’s drawing of Don Quixote watching his armour in
the inn-yard. Whether or not the Venta de Quesada on the Seville road
is, as tradition maintains, the inn described in “Don Quixote,” beyond
all question it was just such an inn-yard as the one behind it that
Cervantes had in his mind’s eye, and it was on just such a rude stone
trough as that beside the primitive draw-well in the corner that he
meant Don Quixote to deposit his armour. Gustave Doré makes it an
elaborate fountain such as no arriero ever watered his mules at in the
corral of any venta in Spain, and thereby entirely misses the point
aimed at by Cervantes. It is the mean, prosaic, commonplace character
of all the surroundings and circumstances that gives a significance to
Don Quixote’s vigil and the ceremony that follows.

Cervantes’ humour is for the most part of that broader and simpler
sort, the strength of which lies in the perception of the incongruous.
It is the incongruity of Sancho in all his ways, words, and works, with
the ideas and aims of his master, quite as much as the wonderful
vitality and truth to nature of the character, that makes him the most
humorous creation in the whole range of fiction. That unsmiling gravity
of which Cervantes was the first great master, “Cervantes’ serious
air,” which sits naturally on Swift alone, perhaps, of later
humourists, is essential to this kind of humour, and here again
Cervantes has suffered at the hands of his interpreters. Nothing,
unless indeed the coarse buffoonery of Phillips, could be more out of
place in an attempt to represent Cervantes, than a flippant, would-be
facetious style, like that of Motteux’s version for example, or the
sprightly, jaunty air, French translators sometimes adopt. It is the
grave matter-of-factness of the narrative, and the apparent
unconsciousness of the author that he is saying anything ludicrous,
anything but the merest commonplace, that give its peculiar flavour to
the humour of Cervantes. His, in fact, is the exact opposite of the
humour of Sterne and the self-conscious humourists. Even when Uncle
Toby is at his best, you are always aware of “the man Sterne” behind
him, watching you over his shoulder to see what effect he is producing.
Cervantes always leaves you alone with Don Quixote and Sancho. He and
Swift and the great humourists always keep themselves out of sight, or,
more properly speaking, never think about themselves at all, unlike our
latter-day school of humourists, who seem to have revived the old
horse-collar method, and try to raise a laugh by some grotesque
assumption of ignorance, imbecility, or bad taste.

It is true that to do full justice to Spanish humour in any other
language is well-nigh an impossibility. There is a natural gravity and
a sonorous stateliness about Spanish, be it ever so colloquial, that
make an absurdity doubly absurd, and give plausibility to the most
preposterous statement. This is what makes Sancho Panza’s drollery the
despair of the conscientious translator. Sancho’s curt comments can
never fall flat, but they lose half their flavour when transferred from
their native Castilian into any other medium. But if foreigners have
failed to do justice to the humour of Cervantes, they are no worse than
his own countrymen. Indeed, were it not for the Spanish peasant’s
relish of “Don Quixote,” one might be tempted to think that the great
humourist was not looked upon as a humourist at all in his own country.

The craze of Don Quixote seems, in some instances, to have communicated
itself to his critics, making them see things that are not in the book
and run full tilt at phantoms that have no existence save in their own
imaginations. Like a good many critics now-a-days, they forget that
screams are not criticism, and that it is only vulgar tastes that are