breadth
wide, and in his heart very readily acquiesced in whipping himself, and
said he to his master, “Very well then, señor, I’ll hold myself in
readiness to gratify your worship’s wishes if I’m to profit by it; for
the love of my wife and children forces me to seem grasping. Let your
worship say how much you will pay me for each lash I give myself.”

“If Sancho,” replied Don Quixote, “I were to requite thee as the
importance and nature of the cure deserves, the treasures of Venice,
the mines of Potosi, would be insufficient to pay thee. See what thou
hast of mine, and put a price on each lash.”

“Of them,” said Sancho, “there are three thousand three hundred and
odd; of these I have given myself five, the rest remain; let the five
go for the odd ones, and let us take the three thousand three hundred,
which at a quarter real apiece (for I will not take less though the
whole world should bid me) make three thousand three hundred quarter
reals; the three thousand are one thousand five hundred half reals,
which make seven hundred and fifty reals; and the three hundred make a
hundred and fifty half reals, which come to seventy-five reals, which
added to the seven hundred and fifty make eight hundred and twenty-five
reals in all. These I will stop out of what I have belonging to your
worship, and I’ll return home rich and content, though well whipped,
for ‘there’s no taking trout’—but I say no more.”

“O blessed Sancho! O dear Sancho!” said Don Quixote; “how we shall be
bound to serve thee, Dulcinea and I, all the days of our lives that
heaven may grant us! If she returns to her lost shape (and it cannot be
but that she will) her misfortune will have been good fortune, and my
defeat a most happy triumph. But look here, Sancho; when wilt thou
begin the scourging? For if thou wilt make short work of it, I will
give thee a hundred reals over and above.”

“When?” said Sancho; “this night without fail. Let your worship order
it so that we pass it out of doors and in the open air, and I’ll
scarify myself.”

Night, longed for by Don Quixote with the greatest anxiety in the
world, came at last, though it seemed to him that the wheels of
Apollo’s car had broken down, and that the day was drawing itself out
longer than usual, just as is the case with lovers, who never make the
reckoning of their desires agree with time. They made their way at
length in among some pleasant trees that stood a little distance from
the road, and there vacating Rocinante’s saddle and Dapple’s
pack-saddle, they stretched themselves on the green grass and made
their supper off Sancho’s stores, and he making a powerful and flexible
whip out of Dapple’s halter and headstall retreated about twenty paces
from his master among some beech trees. Don Quixote seeing him march
off with such resolution and spirit, said to him, “Take care, my
friend, not to cut thyself to pieces; allow the lashes to wait for one
another, and do not be in so great a hurry as to run thyself out of
breath midway; I mean, do not lay on so strenuously as to make thy life
fail thee before thou hast reached the desired number; and that thou
mayest not lose by a card too much or too little, I will station myself
apart and count on my rosary here the lashes thou givest thyself. May
heaven help thee as thy good intention deserves.”

“‘Pledges don’t distress a good payer,’” said Sancho; “I mean to lay on
in such a way as without killing myself to hurt myself, for in that, no
doubt, lies the essence of this miracle.”

He then stripped himself from the waist upwards, and snatching up the
rope he began to lay on and Don Quixote to count the lashes. He might
have given himself six or eight when he began to think the joke no
trifle, and its price very low; and holding his hand for a moment, he
told his master that he cried off on the score of a blind bargain, for
each of those lashes ought to be paid for at the rate of half a real
instead o