f her enchantment and her fate,
From high-born dame to peasant wench transformed
And touched with pity, first I turned the leaves
Of countless volumes of my devilish craft,
And then, in this grim grisly skeleton
Myself encasing, hither have I come
To show where lies the fitting remedy
To give relief in such a piteous case.
    O thou, the pride and pink of all that I wear
The adamantine steel! O shining light,
O beacon, polestar, path and guide of all
Who, scorning slumber and the lazy down,
Adopt the toilsome life of bloodstained arms!
To thee, great hero who all praise transcends,
La Mancha’s lustre and Iberia’s star,
Don Quixote, wise as brave, to thee I say—
For peerless Dulcinea del Toboso
Her pristine form and beauty to regain,
’Tis needful that thy esquire Sancho shall,
On his own sturdy buttocks bared to heaven,
Three thousand and three hundred lashes lay,
And that they smart and sting and hurt him well.
Thus have the authors of her woe resolved.
And this is, gentles, wherefore I have come.


“By all that’s good,” exclaimed Sancho at this, “I’ll just as soon give
myself three stabs with a dagger as three, not to say three thousand,
lashes. The devil take such a way of disenchanting! I don’t see what my
backside has got to do with enchantments. By God, if Señor Merlin has
not found out some other way of disenchanting the lady Dulcinea del
Toboso, she may go to her grave enchanted.”

“But I’ll take you, Don Clown stuffed with garlic,” said Don Quixote,
“and tie you to a tree as naked as when your mother brought you forth,
and give you, not to say three thousand three hundred, but six thousand
six hundred lashes, and so well laid on that they won’t be got rid of
if you try three thousand three hundred times; don’t answer me a word
or I’ll tear your soul out.”

On hearing this Merlin said, “That will not do, for the lashes worthy
Sancho has to receive must be given of his own free will and not by
force, and at whatever time he pleases, for there is no fixed limit
assigned to him; but it is permitted him, if he likes to commute by
half the pain of this whipping, to let them be given by the hand of
another, though it may be somewhat weighty.”

“Not a hand, my own or anybody else’s, weighty or weighable, shall
touch me,” said Sancho. “Was it I that gave birth to the lady Dulcinea
del Toboso, that my backside is to pay for the sins of her eyes? My
master, indeed, that’s a part of her—for, he’s always calling her ‘my
life’ and ‘my soul,’ and his stay and prop—may and ought to whip
himself for her and take all the trouble required for her
disenchantment. But for me to whip myself! Abernuncio!”

As soon as Sancho had done speaking the nymph in silver that was at the
side of Merlin’s ghost stood up, and removing the thin veil from her
face disclosed one that seemed to all something more than exceedingly
beautiful; and with a masculine freedom from embarrassment and in a
voice not very like a lady’s, addressing Sancho directly, said, “Thou
wretched squire, soul of a pitcher, heart of a cork tree, with bowels
of flint and pebbles; if, thou impudent thief, they bade thee throw
thyself down from some lofty tower; if, enemy of mankind, they asked
thee to swallow a dozen of toads, two of lizards, and three of adders;
if they wanted thee to slay thy wife and children with a sharp
murderous scimitar, it would be no wonder for thee to show thyself
stubborn and squeamish. But to make a piece of work about three
thousand three hundred lashes, what every poor little charity-boy gets
every month—it is enough to amaze, astonish, astound the compassionate
bowels of all who hear it, nay, all who come to hear it in the course
of time. Turn, O miserable, hard-hearted animal, turn, I say, those
timorous owl’s eyes upon these of mine that are compared to radiant
stars, and thou wilt see them weeping trickling streams and rills, and
tracing furrows, tracks, and paths over the fai