mbracing it over and over again;” and so saying he thrust it into
Sancho’s hands, who raising it aloft pointed to his mouth, gazed at the
stars for a quarter of an hour; and when he had done drinking let his
head fall on one side, and giving a deep sigh, exclaimed, “Ah, whoreson
rogue, how catholic it is!”

“There, you see,” said he of the Grove, hearing Sancho’s exclamation,
“how you have called this wine whoreson by way of praise.”

“Well,” said Sancho, “I own it, and I grant it is no dishonour to call
anyone whoreson when it is to be understood as praise. But tell me,
señor, by what you love best, is this Ciudad Real wine?”

“O rare wine-taster!” said he of the Grove; “nowhere else indeed does
it come from, and it has some years’ age too.”

“Leave me alone for that,” said Sancho; “never fear but I’ll hit upon
the place it came from somehow. What would you say, sir squire, to my
having such a great natural instinct in judging wines that you have
only to let me smell one and I can tell positively its country, its
kind, its flavour and soundness, the changes it will undergo, and
everything that appertains to a wine? But it is no wonder, for I have
had in my family, on my father’s side, the two best wine-tasters that
have been known in La Mancha for many a long year, and to prove it I’ll
tell you now a thing that happened them. They gave the two of them some
wine out of a cask, to try, asking their opinion as to the condition,
quality, goodness or badness of the wine. One of them tried it with the
tip of his tongue, the other did no more than bring it to his nose. The
first said the wine had a flavour of iron, the second said it had a
stronger flavour of cordovan. The owner said the cask was clean, and
that nothing had been added to the wine from which it could have got a
flavour of either iron or leather. Nevertheless, these two great
wine-tasters held to what they had said. Time went by, the wine was
sold, and when they came to clean out the cask, they found in it a
small key hanging to a thong of cordovan; see now if one who comes of
the same stock has not a right to give his opinion in such like cases.”

“Therefore, I say,” said he of the Grove, “let us give up going in
quest of adventures, and as we have loaves let us not go looking for
cakes, but return to our cribs, for God will find us there if it be his
will.”

“Until my master reaches Saragossa,” said Sancho, “I’ll remain in his
service; after that we’ll see.”

The end of it was that the two squires talked so much and drank so much
that sleep had to tie their tongues and moderate their thirst, for to
quench it was impossible; and so the pair of them fell asleep clinging
to the now nearly empty bota and with half-chewed morsels in their
mouths; and there we will leave them for the present, to relate what
passed between the Knight of the Grove and him of the Rueful
Countenance.



p13e.jpg (43K)



CHAPTER XIV.
WHEREIN IS CONTINUED THE ADVENTURE OF THE KNIGHT OF THE GROVE




p14a.jpg (120K)

Full Size



Among the things that passed between Don Quixote and the Knight of the
Wood, the history tells us he of the Grove said to Don Quixote, “In
fine, sir knight, I would have you know that my destiny, or, more
properly speaking, my choice led me to fall in love with the peerless
Casildea de Vandalia. I call her peerless because she has no peer,
whether it be in bodily stature or in the supremacy of rank and beauty.
This same Casildea, then, that I speak of, requited my honourable
passion and gentle aspirations by compelling me, as his stepmother did
Hercules, to engage in many perils of various sorts, at the end of each
promising me that, with the end of the next, the object of my hopes
should be attained; but my labours have gone on increasing link by link
until they are past counting, nor do I know what will be the last one
that is to be the beginning of the accomplishment of my chaste desi