ng himself about
Rocinante, as being a prize that was no good either to pledge or sell.
While Sancho slept he stole his ass, and before day dawned he was far
out of reach.



c23d.jpg (256K)

Full Size




Aurora made her appearance bringing gladness to the earth but sadness
to Sancho Panza, for he found that his Dapple was missing, and seeing
himself bereft of him he began the saddest and most doleful lament in
the world, so loud that Don Quixote awoke at his exclamations and heard
him saying, “O son of my bowels, born in my very house, my children’s
plaything, my wife’s joy, the envy of my neighbours, relief of my
burdens, and lastly, half supporter of myself, for with the
six-and-twenty maravedis thou didst earn me daily I met half my
charges.”

Don Quixote, when he heard the lament and learned the cause, consoled
Sancho with the best arguments he could, entreating him to be patient,
and promising to give him a letter of exchange ordering three out of
five ass-colts that he had at home to be given to him. Sancho took
comfort at this, dried his tears, suppressed his sobs, and returned
thanks for the kindness shown him by Don Quixote. He on his part was
rejoiced to the heart on entering the mountains, as they seemed to him
to be just the place for the adventures he was in quest of. They
brought back to his memory the marvellous adventures that had befallen
knights-errant in like solitudes and wilds, and he went along
reflecting on these things, so absorbed and carried away by them that
he had no thought for anything else.



c23e.jpg (280K)

Full Size




Nor had Sancho any other care (now that he fancied he was travelling in
a safe quarter) than to satisfy his appetite with such remains as were
left of the clerical spoils, and so he marched behind his master laden
with what Dapple used to carry, emptying the sack and packing his
paunch, and so long as he could go that way, he would not have given a
farthing to meet with another adventure.

While so engaged he raised his eyes and saw that his master had halted,
and was trying with the point of his pike to lift some bulky object
that lay upon the ground, on which he hastened to join him and help him
if it were needful, and reached him just as with the point of the pike
he was raising a saddle-pad with a valise attached to it, half or
rather wholly rotten and torn; but so heavy were they that Sancho had
to help to take them up, and his master directed him to see what the
valise contained. Sancho did so with great alacrity, and though the
valise was secured by a chain and padlock, from its torn and rotten
condition he was able to see its contents, which were four shirts of
fine holland, and other articles of linen no less curious than clean;
and in a handkerchief he found a good lot of gold crowns, and as soon
as he saw them he exclaimed:

“Blessed be all Heaven for sending us an adventure that is good for
something!”

Searching further he found a little memorandum book richly bound; this
Don Quixote asked of him, telling him to take the money and keep it for
himself. Sancho kissed his hands for the favour, and cleared the valise
of its linen, which he stowed away in the provision sack. Considering
the whole matter, Don Quixote observed:

“It seems to me, Sancho—and it is impossible it can be otherwise—that
some strayed traveller must have crossed this sierra and been attacked
and slain by footpads, who brought him to this remote spot to bury
him.”

“That cannot be,” answered Sancho, “because if they had been robbers
they would not have left this money.”

“Thou art right,” said Don Quixote, “and I cannot guess or explain what
this may mean; but stay; let us see if in this memorandum book there is
anything written by which we may be able to trace out or discover what
we want to know.”

He opened it, and the first thing he found in it, written roughly but
in a very good hand, was a sonnet, an