ious things I told you I had
to tell, and if you don’t think them so, I have got no others;” and
with this the worthy fellow brought his story to a close.

Just at this moment there came in at the gate of the inn a man entirely
clad in chamois leather, hose, breeches, and doublet, who said in a
loud voice, “Señor host, have you room? Here’s the divining ape and the
show of the Release of Melisendra just coming.”

“Ods body!” said the landlord, “why, it’s Master Pedro! We’re in for a
grand night!” I forgot to mention that the said Master Pedro had his
left eye and nearly half his cheek covered with a patch of green
taffety, showing that something ailed all that side. “Your worship is
welcome, Master Pedro,” continued the landlord; “but where are the ape
and the show, for I don’t see them?” “They are close at hand,” said he
in the chamois leather, “but I came on first to know if there was any
room.” “I’d make the Duke of Alva himself clear out to make room for
Master Pedro,” said the landlord; “bring in the ape and the show;
there’s company in the inn to-night that will pay to see that and the
cleverness of the ape.” “So be it by all means,” said the man with the
patch; “I’ll lower the price, and be well satisfied if I only pay my
expenses; and now I’ll go back and hurry on the cart with the ape and
the show;” and with this he went out of the inn.

Don Quixote at once asked the landlord what this Master Pedro was, and
what was the show and what was the ape he had with him; which the
landlord replied, “This is a famous puppet-showman, who for some time
past has been going about this Mancha de Aragon, exhibiting a show of
the release of Melisendra by the famous Don Gaiferos, one of the best
and best-represented stories that have been seen in this part of the
kingdom for many a year; he has also with him an ape with the most
extraordinary gift ever seen in an ape or imagined in a human being;
for if you ask him anything, he listens attentively to the question,
and then jumps on his master’s shoulder, and pressing close to his ear
tells him the answer which Master Pedro then delivers. He says a great
deal more about things past than about things to come; and though he
does not always hit the truth in every case, most times he is not far
wrong, so that he makes us fancy he has got the devil in him. He gets
two reals for every question if the ape answers; I mean if his master
answers for him after he has whispered into his ear; and so it is
believed that this same Master Pedro is very rich. He is a ‘gallant
man’ as they say in Italy, and good company, and leads the finest life
in the world; talks more than six, drinks more than a dozen, and all by
his tongue, and his ape, and his show.”

Master Pedro now came back, and in a cart followed the show and the
ape—a big one, without a tail and with buttocks as bare as felt, but
not vicious-looking. As soon as Don Quixote saw him, he asked him, “Can
you tell me, sir fortune-teller, what fish do we catch, and how will it
be with us? See, here are my two reals,” and he bade Sancho give them
to Master Pedro; but he answered for the ape and said, “Señor, this
animal does not give any answer or information touching things that are
to come; of things past he knows something, and more or less of things
present.”

“Gad,” said Sancho, “I would not give a farthing to be told what’s past
with me, for who knows that better than I do myself? And to pay for
being told what I know would be mighty foolish. But as you know things
present, here are my two reals, and tell me, most excellent sir ape,
what is my wife Teresa Panza doing now, and what is she diverting
herself with?”

Master Pedro refused to take the money, saying, “I will not receive
payment in advance or until the service has been first rendered;” and
then with his right hand he gave a couple of slaps on his left
shoulder, and with one spring the ape perched himself upon it, and
pu