’s house, and will be here
immediately.”

Don Quixote cheered up a little and said, “Of a truth I am almost ready
to say I should have been glad had it turned out just the other way,
for it would have obliged me to cross over to Barbary, where by the
might of my arm I should have restored to liberty, not only Don
Gregorio, but all the Christian captives there are in Barbary. But what
am I saying, miserable being that I am? Am I not he that has been
conquered? Am I not he that has been overthrown? Am I not he who must
not take up arms for a year? Then what am I making professions for;
what am I bragging about; when it is fitter for me to handle the
distaff than the sword?”

“No more of that, señor,” said Sancho; “‘let the hen live, even though
it be with her pip;’ ‘to-day for thee and to-morrow for me;’ in these
affairs of encounters and whacks one must not mind them, for he that
falls to-day may get up to-morrow; unless indeed he chooses to lie in
bed, I mean gives way to weakness and does not pluck up fresh spirit
for fresh battles; let your worship get up now to receive Don Gregorio;
for the household seems to be in a bustle, and no doubt he has come by
this time;” and so it proved, for as soon as Don Gregorio and the
renegade had given the viceroy an account of the voyage out and home,
Don Gregorio, eager to see Ana Felix, came with the renegade to Don
Antonio’s house. When they carried him away from Algiers he was in
woman’s dress; on board the vessel, however, he exchanged it for that
of a captive who escaped with him; but in whatever dress he might be he
looked like one to be loved and served and esteemed, for he was
surpassingly well-favoured, and to judge by appearances some seventeen
or eighteen years of age. Ricote and his daughter came out to welcome
him, the father with tears, the daughter with bashfulness. They did not
embrace each other, for where there is deep love there will never be
overmuch boldness. Seen side by side, the comeliness of Don Gregorio
and the beauty of Ana Felix were the admiration of all who were
present. It was silence that spoke for the lovers at that moment, and
their eyes were the tongues that declared their pure and happy
feelings. The renegade explained the measures and means he had adopted
to rescue Don Gregorio, and Don Gregorio at no great length, but in a
few words, in which he showed that his intelligence was in advance of
his years, described the peril and embarrassment he found himself in
among the women with whom he had sojourned. To conclude, Ricote
liberally recompensed and rewarded as well the renegade as the men who
had rowed; and the renegade effected his readmission into the body of
the Church and was reconciled with it, and from a rotten limb became by
penance and repentance a clean and sound one.

Two days later the viceroy discussed with Don Antonio the steps they
should take to enable Ana Felix and her father to stay in Spain, for it
seemed to them there could be no objection to a daughter who was so
good a Christian and a father to all appearance so well disposed
remaining there. Don Antonio offered to arrange the matter at the
capital, whither he was compelled to go on some other business, hinting
that many a difficult affair was settled there with the help of favour
and bribes.

“Nay,” said Ricote, who was present during the conversation, “it will
not do to rely upon favour or bribes, because with the great Don
Bernardino de Velasco, Conde de Salazar, to whom his Majesty has
entrusted our expulsion, neither entreaties nor promises, bribes nor
appeals to compassion, are of any use; for though it is true he mingles
mercy with justice, still, seeing that the whole body of our nation is
tainted and corrupt, he applies to it the cautery that burns rather
than the salve that soothes; and thus, by prudence, sagacity, care and
the fear he inspires, he has borne on his mighty shoulders the weight
of this great po