ngratitude than the English-speaking public that did not pay off
Scott’s liabilities. It did the best it could; it read his book and
liked it and bought it, and encouraged the bookseller to pay him well
for others.

It has been also made a reproach to Spain that she has erected no
monument to the man she is proudest of; no monument, that is to say, of
him; for the bronze statue in the little garden of the Plaza de las
Cortés, a fair work of art no doubt, and unexceptionable had it been
set up to the local poet in the market-place of some provincial town,
is not worthy of Cervantes or of Madrid. But what need has Cervantes of
“such weak witness of his name;” or what could a monument do in his
case except testify to the self-glorification of those who had put it
up? Si monumentum quoeris, circumspice. The nearest bookseller’s shop
will show what bathos there would be in a monument to the author of
“Don Quixote.”




‘DON QUIXOTE’


Nine editions of the First Part of “Don Quixote” had already appeared
before Cervantes died, thirty thousand copies in all, according to his
own estimate, and a tenth was printed at Barcelona the year after his
death. So large a number naturally supplied the demand for some time,
but by 1634 it appears to have been exhausted; and from that time down
to the present day the stream of editions has continued to flow rapidly
and regularly. The translations show still more clearly in what request
the book has been from the very outset. In seven years from the
completion of the work it had been translated into the four leading
languages of Europe. Except the Bible, in fact, no book has been so
widely diffused as “Don Quixote.” The “Imitatio Christi” may have been
translated into as many different languages, and perhaps “Robinson
Crusoe” and the “Vicar of Wakefield” into nearly as many, but in
multiplicity of translations and editions “Don Quixote” leaves them all
far behind.

Still more remarkable is the character of this wide diffusion. “Don
Quixote” has been thoroughly naturalised among people whose ideas about
knight-errantry, if they had any at all, were of the vaguest, who had
never seen or heard of a book of chivalry, who could not possibly feel
the humour of the burlesque or sympathise with the author’s purpose.
Another curious fact is that this, the most cosmopolitan book in the
world, is one of the most intensely national. “Manon Lescaut” is not
more thoroughly French, “Tom Jones” not more English, “Rob Roy” not
more Scotch, than “Don Quixote” is Spanish, in character, in ideas, in
sentiment, in local colour, in everything. What, then, is the secret of
this unparalleled popularity, increasing year by year for well-nigh
three centuries? One explanation, no doubt, is that of all the books in
the world, “Don Quixote” is the most catholic. There is something in it
for every sort of reader, young or old, sage or simple, high or low. As
Cervantes himself says with a touch of pride, “It is thumbed and read
and got by heart by people of all sorts; the children turn its leaves,
the young people read it, the grown men understand it, the old folk
praise it.”

But it would be idle to deny that the ingredient which, more than its
humour, or its wisdom, or the fertility of invention or knowledge of
human nature it displays, has insured its success with the multitude,
is the vein of farce that runs through it. It was the attack upon the
sheep, the battle with the wine-skins, Mambrino’s helmet, the balsam of
Fierabras, Don Quixote knocked over by the sails of the windmill,
Sancho tossed in the blanket, the mishaps and misadventures of master
and man, that were originally the great attraction, and perhaps are so
still to some extent with the majority of readers. It is plain that
“Don Quixote” was generally regarded at first, and indeed in Spain for
a long time, as little more than a queer droll book, full of laughable
incidents and absurd situation