er, he said to himself, “It’s these that are the real
chanted things, and not the ones my master talks of. What can those
wretches have done to be so whipped; and how does that one man who goes
along there whistling dare to whip so many? I declare this is hell, or
at least purgatory!”

Don Quixote, observing how attentively Sancho regarded what was going
on, said to him, “Ah, Sancho my friend, how quickly and cheaply might
you finish off the disenchantment of Dulcinea, if you would strip to
the waist and take your place among those gentlemen! Amid the pain and
sufferings of so many you would not feel your own much; and moreover
perhaps the sage Merlin would allow each of these lashes, being laid on
with a good hand, to count for ten of those which you must give
yourself at last.”

The general was about to ask what these lashes were, and what was
Dulcinea’s disenchantment, when a sailor exclaimed, “Monjui signals
that there is an oared vessel off the coast to the west.”

On hearing this the general sprang upon the gangway crying, “Now then,
my sons, don’t let her give us the slip! It must be some Algerine
corsair brigantine that the watchtower signals to us.” The three others
immediately came alongside the chief galley to receive their orders.
The general ordered two to put out to sea while he with the other kept
in shore, so that in this way the vessel could not escape them. The
crews plied the oars driving the galleys so furiously that they seemed
to fly. The two that had put out to sea, after a couple of miles
sighted a vessel which, so far as they could make out, they judged to
be one of fourteen or fifteen banks, and so she proved. As soon as the
vessel discovered the galleys she went about with the object and in the
hope of making her escape by her speed; but the attempt failed, for the
chief galley was one of the fastest vessels afloat, and overhauled her
so rapidly that they on board the brigantine saw clearly there was no
possibility of escaping, and the rais therefore would have had them
drop their oars and give themselves up so as not to provoke the captain
in command of our galleys to anger. But chance, directing things
otherwise, so ordered it that just as the chief galley came close
enough for those on board the vessel to hear the shouts from her
calling on them to surrender, two Toraquis, that is to say two Turks,
both drunken, that with a dozen more were on board the brigantine,
discharged their muskets, killing two of the soldiers that lined the
sides of our vessel. Seeing this the general swore he would not leave
one of those he found on board the vessel alive, but as he bore down
furiously upon her she slipped away from him underneath the oars. The
galley shot a good way ahead; those on board the vessel saw their case
was desperate, and while the galley was coming about they made sail,
and by sailing and rowing once more tried to sheer off; but their
activity did not do them as much good as their rashness did them harm,
for the galley coming up with them in a little more than half a mile
threw her oars over them and took the whole of them alive. The other
two galleys now joined company and all four returned with the prize to
the beach, where a vast multitude stood waiting for them, eager to see
what they brought back. The general anchored close in, and perceived
that the viceroy of the city was on the shore. He ordered the skiff to
push off to fetch him, and the yard to be lowered for the purpose of
hanging forthwith the rais and the rest of the men taken on board the
vessel, about six-and-thirty in number, all smart fellows and most of
them Turkish musketeers. He asked which was the rais of the brigantine,
and was answered in Spanish by one of the prisoners (who afterwards
proved to be a Spanish renegade), “This young man, señor, that you see
here is our rais,” and he pointed to one of the handsomest and most
gallant-looking youths that could be im