ith the obstacle that may interfere with it, and remove myself
from between you. Long live the rich Camacho! many a happy year may he
live with the ungrateful Quiteria! and let the poor Basilio die,
Basilio whose poverty clipped the wings of his happiness, and brought
him to the grave!”

And so saying, he seized the staff he had driven into the ground, and
leaving one half of it fixed there, showed it to be a sheath that
concealed a tolerably long rapier; and, what may be called its hilt
being planted in the ground, he swiftly, coolly, and deliberately threw
himself upon it, and in an instant the bloody point and half the steel
blade appeared at his back, the unhappy man falling to the earth bathed
in his blood, and transfixed by his own weapon.

His friends at once ran to his aid, filled with grief at his misery and
sad fate, and Don Quixote, dismounting from Rocinante, hastened to
support him, and took him in his arms, and found he had not yet ceased
to breathe. They were about to draw out the rapier, but the priest who
was standing by objected to its being withdrawn before he had confessed
him, as the instant of its withdrawal would be that of this death.
Basilio, however, reviving slightly, said in a weak voice, as though in
pain, “If thou wouldst consent, cruel Quiteria, to give me thy hand as
my bride in this last fatal moment, I might still hope that my rashness
would find pardon, as by its means I attained the bliss of being
thine.”

Hearing this the priest bade him think of the welfare of his soul
rather than of the cravings of the body, and in all earnestness implore
God’s pardon for his sins and for his rash resolve; to which Basilio
replied that he was determined not to confess unless Quiteria first
gave him her hand in marriage, for that happiness would compose his
mind and give him courage to make his confession.

Don Quixote hearing the wounded man’s entreaty, exclaimed aloud that
what Basilio asked was just and reasonable, and moreover a request that
might be easily complied with; and that it would be as much to Señor
Camacho’s honour to receive the lady Quiteria as the widow of the brave
Basilio as if he received her direct from her father.

“In this case,” said he, “it will be only to say ‘yes,’ and no
consequences can follow the utterance of the word, for the nuptial
couch of this marriage must be the grave.”

Camacho was listening to all this, perplexed and bewildered and not
knowing what to say or do; but so urgent were the entreaties of
Basilio’s friends, imploring him to allow Quiteria to give him her
hand, so that his soul, quitting this life in despair, should not be
lost, that they moved, nay, forced him, to say that if Quiteria were
willing to give it he was satisfied, as it was only putting off the
fulfillment of his wishes for a moment. At once all assailed Quiteria
and pressed her, some with prayers, and others with tears, and others
with persuasive arguments, to give her hand to poor Basilio; but she,
harder than marble and more unmoved than any statue, seemed unable or
unwilling to utter a word, nor would she have given any reply had not
the priest bade her decide quickly what she meant to do, as Basilio now
had his soul at his teeth, and there was no time for hesitation.



p21b.jpg (374K)

Full Size



On this the fair Quiteria, to all appearance distressed, grieved, and
repentant, advanced without a word to where Basilio lay, his eyes
already turned in his head, his breathing short and painful, murmuring
the name of Quiteria between his teeth, and apparently about to die
like a heathen and not like a Christian. Quiteria approached him, and
kneeling, demanded his hand by signs without speaking. Basilio opened
his eyes and gazing fixedly at her, said, “O Quiteria, why hast thou
turned compassionate at a moment when thy compassion will serve as a
dagger to rob me of life, for I have not now the strength left either
to bear