 what you have seen. To sum up, there is Don Gregorio in woman’s
dress, among women, in imminent danger of his life; and here am I, with
hands bound, in expectation, or rather in dread, of losing my life, of
which I am already weary. Here, sirs, ends my sad story, as true as it
is unhappy; all I ask of you is to allow me to die like a Christian,
for, as I have already said, I am not to be charged with the offence of
which those of my nation are guilty;” and she stood silent, her eyes
filled with moving tears, accompanied by plenty from the bystanders.
The viceroy, touched with compassion, went up to her without speaking
and untied the cord that bound the hands of the Moorish girl.

But all the while the Morisco Christian was telling her strange story,
an elderly pilgrim, who had come on board of the galley at the same
time as the viceroy, kept his eyes fixed upon her; and the instant she
ceased speaking he threw himself at her feet, and embracing them said
in a voice broken by sobs and sighs, “O Ana Felix, my unhappy daughter,
I am thy father Ricote, come back to look for thee, unable to live
without thee, my soul that thou art!”

At these words of his, Sancho opened his eyes and raised his head,
which he had been holding down, brooding over his unlucky excursion;
and looking at the pilgrim he recognised in him that same Ricote he met
the day he quitted his government, and felt satisfied that this was his
daughter. She being now unbound embraced her father, mingling her tears
with his, while he addressing the general and the viceroy said, “This,
sirs, is my daughter, more unhappy in her adventures than in her name.
She is Ana Felix, surnamed Ricote, celebrated as much for her own
beauty as for my wealth. I quitted my native land in search of some
shelter or refuge for us abroad, and having found one in Germany I
returned in this pilgrim’s dress, in the company of some other German
pilgrims, to seek my daughter and take up a large quantity of treasure
I had left buried. My daughter I did not find, the treasure I found and
have with me; and now, in this strange roundabout way you have seen, I
find the treasure that more than all makes me rich, my beloved
daughter. If our innocence and her tears and mine can with strict
justice open the door to clemency, extend it to us, for we never had
any intention of injuring you, nor do we sympathise with the aims of
our people, who have been justly banished.”

“I know Ricote well,” said Sancho at this, “and I know too that what he
says about Ana Felix being his daughter is true; but as to those other
particulars about going and coming, and having good or bad intentions,
I say nothing.”

While all present stood amazed at this strange occurrence the general
said, “At any rate your tears will not allow me to keep my oath; live,
fair Ana Felix, all the years that heaven has allotted you; but these
rash insolent fellows must pay the penalty of the crime they have
committed;” and with that he gave orders to have the two Turks who had
killed his two soldiers hanged at once at the yard-arm. The viceroy,
however, begged him earnestly not to hang them, as their behaviour
savoured rather of madness than of bravado. The general yielded to the
viceroy’s request, for revenge is not easily taken in cold blood. They
then tried to devise some scheme for rescuing Don Gaspar Gregorio from
the danger in which he had been left. Ricote offered for that object
more than two thousand ducats that he had in pearls and gems; they
proposed several plans, but none so good as that suggested by the
renegade already mentioned, who offered to return to Algiers in a small
vessel of about six banks, manned by Christian rowers, as he knew
where, how, and when he could and should land, nor was he ignorant of
the house in which Don Gaspar was staying. The general and the viceroy
had some hesitation about placing confidence in the renegade and
entrusting him with the 