ominate, Señor Samson,” said Sancho
here; “my master will attack a hundred armed men as a greedy boy would
half a dozen melons. Body of the world, señor bachelor! there is a time
to attack and a time to retreat, and it is not to be always ‘Santiago,
and close Spain!’ Moreover, I have heard it said (and I think by my
master himself, if I remember rightly) that the mean of valour lies
between the extremes of cowardice and rashness; and if that be so, I
don’t want him to fly without having good reason, or to attack when the
odds make it better not. But, above all things, I warn my master that
if he is to take me with him it must be on the condition that he is to
do all the fighting, and that I am not to be called upon to do anything
except what concerns keeping him clean and comfortable; in this I will
dance attendance on him readily; but to expect me to draw sword, even
against rascally churls of the hatchet and hood, is idle. I don’t set
up to be a fighting man, Señor Samson, but only the best and most loyal
squire that ever served knight-errant; and if my master Don Quixote, in
consideration of my many faithful services, is pleased to give me some
island of the many his worship says one may stumble on in these parts,
I will take it as a great favour; and if he does not give it to me, I
was born like everyone else, and a man must not live in dependence on
anyone except God; and what is more, my bread will taste as well, and
perhaps even better, without a government than if I were a governor;
and how do I know but that in these governments the devil may have
prepared some trip for me, to make me lose my footing and fall and
knock my grinders out? Sancho I was born and Sancho I mean to die. But
for all that, if heaven were to make me a fair offer of an island or
something else of the kind, without much trouble and without much risk,
I am not such a fool as to refuse it; for they say, too, ‘when they
offer thee a heifer, run with a halter; and ‘when good luck comes to
thee, take it in.’”

“Brother Sancho,” said Carrasco, “you have spoken like a professor;
but, for all that, put your trust in God and in Señor Don Quixote, for
he will give you a kingdom, not to say an island.”

“It is all the same, be it more or be it less,” replied Sancho; “though
I can tell Señor Carrasco that my master would not throw the kingdom he
might give me into a sack all in holes; for I have felt my own pulse
and I find myself sound enough to rule kingdoms and govern islands; and
I have before now told my master as much.”

“Take care, Sancho,” said Samson; “honours change manners, and perhaps
when you find yourself a governor you won’t know the mother that bore
you.”

“That may hold good of those that are born in the ditches,” said
Sancho, “not of those who have the fat of an old Christian four fingers
deep on their souls, as I have. Nay, only look at my disposition, is
that likely to show ingratitude to anyone?”

“God grant it,” said Don Quixote; “we shall see when the government
comes; and I seem to see it already.”

He then begged the bachelor, if he were a poet, to do him the favour of
composing some verses for him conveying the farewell he meant to take
of his lady Dulcinea del Toboso, and to see that a letter of her name
was placed at the beginning of each line, so that, at the end of the
verses, “Dulcinea del Toboso” might be read by putting together the
first letters. The bachelor replied that although he was not one of the
famous poets of Spain, who were, they said, only three and a half, he
would not fail to compose the required verses; though he saw a great
difficulty in the task, as the letters which made up the name were
seventeen; so, if he made four ballad stanzas of four lines each, there
would be a letter over, and if he made them of five, what they called
decimas or redondillas, there were three letters short; nevertheless he
would try to drop a letter as well as he could, 