d by his name and find
himself embraced by a foreign pilgrim, and after regarding him steadily
without speaking he was still unable to recognise him; but the pilgrim
perceiving his perplexity cried, “What! and is it possible, Sancho
Panza, that thou dost not know thy neighbour Ricote, the Morisco
shopkeeper of thy village?”

Sancho upon this looking at him more carefully began to recall his
features, and at last recognised him perfectly, and without getting off
the ass threw his arms round his neck saying, “Who the devil could have
known thee, Ricote, in this mummer’s dress thou art in? Tell me, who
has frenchified thee, and how dost thou dare to return to Spain, where
if they catch thee and recognise thee it will go hard enough with
thee?”

“If thou dost not betray me, Sancho,” said the pilgrim, “I am safe; for
in this dress no one will recognise me; but let us turn aside out of
the road into that grove there where my comrades are going to eat and
rest, and thou shalt eat with them there, for they are very good
fellows; I’ll have time enough to tell thee then all that has happened
me since I left our village in obedience to his Majesty’s edict that
threatened such severities against the unfortunate people of my nation,
as thou hast heard.”

Sancho complied, and Ricote having spoken to the other pilgrims they
withdrew to the grove they saw, turning a considerable distance out of
the road. They threw down their staves, took off their pilgrim’s cloaks
and remained in their under-clothing; they were all good-looking young
fellows, except Ricote, who was a man somewhat advanced in years. They
carried alforjas all of them, and all apparently well filled, at least
with things provocative of thirst, such as would summon it from two
leagues off. They stretched themselves on the ground, and making a
tablecloth of the grass they spread upon it bread, salt, knives,
walnut, scraps of cheese, and well-picked ham-bones which if they were
past gnawing were not past sucking. They also put down a black dainty
called, they say, caviar, and made of the eggs of fish, a great
thirst-wakener. Nor was there any lack of olives, dry, it is true, and
without any seasoning, but for all that toothsome and pleasant. But
what made the best show in the field of the banquet was half a dozen
botas of wine, for each of them produced his own from his alforjas;
even the good Ricote, who from a Morisco had transformed himself into a
German or Dutchman, took out his, which in size might have vied with
the five others. They then began to eat with very great relish and very
leisurely, making the most of each morsel—very small ones of
everything—they took up on the point of the knife; and then all at the
same moment raised their arms and botas aloft, the mouths placed in
their mouths, and all eyes fixed on heaven just as if they were taking
aim at it; and in this attitude they remained ever so long, wagging
their heads from side to side as if in acknowledgment of the pleasure
they were enjoying while they decanted the bowels of the bottles into
their own stomachs.

Sancho beheld all, “and nothing gave him pain;” so far from that,
acting on the proverb he knew so well, “when thou art at Rome do as
thou seest,” he asked Ricote for his bota and took aim like the rest of
them, and with not less enjoyment. Four times did the botas bear being
uplifted, but the fifth it was all in vain, for they were drier and
more sapless than a rush by that time, which made the jollity that had
been kept up so far begin to flag.

Every now and then someone of them would grasp Sancho’s right hand in
his own saying, “Español y Tudesqui tuto uno: bon compaño;” and Sancho
would answer, “Bon compaño, jur a Di!” and then go off into a fit of
laughter that lasted an hour, without a thought for the moment of
anything that had befallen him in his government; for cares have very
little sway over us while we are eating and drinking. At