em up a tolerably good dinner. All this time Don Quixote was
asleep, and they thought it best not to waken him, as sleeping would
now do him more good than eating.

While at dinner, the company consisting of the landlord, his wife,
their daughter, Maritornes, and all the travellers, they discussed the
strange craze of Don Quixote and the manner in which he had been found;
and the landlady told them what had taken place between him and the
carrier; and then, looking round to see if Sancho was there, when she
saw he was not, she gave them the whole story of his blanketing, which
they received with no little amusement. But on the curate observing
that it was the books of chivalry which Don Quixote had read that had
turned his brain, the landlord said:

“I cannot understand how that can be, for in truth to my mind there is
no better reading in the world, and I have here two or three of them,
with other writings that are the very life, not only of myself but of
plenty more; for when it is harvest-time, the reapers flock here on
holidays, and there is always one among them who can read and who takes
up one of these books, and we gather round him, thirty or more of us,
and stay listening to him with a delight that makes our grey hairs grow
young again. At least I can say for myself that when I hear of what
furious and terrible blows the knights deliver, I am seized with the
longing to do the same, and I would like to be hearing about them night
and day.”

“And I just as much,” said the landlady, “because I never have a quiet
moment in my house except when you are listening to someone reading;
for then you are so taken up that for the time being you forget to
scold.”

“That is true,” said Maritornes; “and, faith, I relish hearing these
things greatly too, for they are very pretty; especially when they
describe some lady or another in the arms of her knight under the
orange trees, and the duenna who is keeping watch for them half dead
with envy and fright; all this I say is as good as honey.”

“And you, what do you think, young lady?” said the curate turning to
the landlord’s daughter.

“I don’t know indeed, señor,” said she; “I listen too, and to tell the
truth, though I do not understand it, I like hearing it; but it is not
the blows that my father likes that I like, but the laments the knights
utter when they are separated from their ladies; and indeed they
sometimes make me weep with the pity I feel for them.”

“Then you would console them if it was for you they wept, young lady?”
said Dorothea.

“I don’t know what I should do,” said the girl; “I only know that there
are some of those ladies so cruel that they call their knights tigers
and lions and a thousand other foul names: and Jesus! I don’t know what
sort of folk they can be, so unfeeling and heartless, that rather than
bestow a glance upon a worthy man they leave him to die or go mad. I
don’t know what is the good of such prudery; if it is for honour’s
sake, why not marry them? That’s all they want.”

“Hush, child,” said the landlady; “it seems to me thou knowest a great
deal about these things, and it is not fit for girls to know or talk so
much.”

“As the gentleman asked me, I could not help answering him,” said the
girl.

“Well then,” said the curate, “bring me these books, señor landlord,
for I should like to see them.”

“With all my heart,” said he, and going into his own room he brought
out an old valise secured with a little chain, on opening which the
curate found in it three large books and some manuscripts written in a
very good hand. The first that he opened he found to be “Don Cirongilio
of Thrace,” and the second “Don Felixmarte of Hircania,” and the other
the “History of the Great Captain Gonzalo Hernandez de Cordova, with
the Life of Diego García de Paredes.”

When the curate read the two first titles he looked over at the barber
and said, “We want my friend’s housekeeper and niece her