
influenced by strings of superlatives, three-piled hyperboles, and
pompous epithets. But what strikes one as particularly strange is that
while they deal in extravagant eulogies, and ascribe all manner of
imaginary ideas and qualities to Cervantes, they show no perception of
the quality that ninety-nine out of a hundred of his readers would rate
highest in him, and hold to be the one that raises him above all
rivalry.

To speak of “Don Quixote” as if it were merely a humorous book would be
a manifest misdescription. Cervantes at times makes it a kind of
commonplace book for occasional essays and criticisms, or for the
observations and reflections and gathered wisdom of a long and stirring
life. It is a mine of shrewd observation on mankind and human nature.
Among modern novels there may be, here and there, more elaborate
studies of character, but there is no book richer in individualised
character. What Coleridge said of Shakespeare in minimis is true of
Cervantes; he never, even for the most temporary purpose, puts forward
a lay figure. There is life and individuality in all his characters,
however little they may have to do, or however short a time they may be
before the reader. Samson Carrasco, the curate, Teresa Panza,
Altisidora, even the two students met on the road to the cave of
Montesinos, all live and move and have their being; and it is
characteristic of the broad humanity of Cervantes that there is not a
hateful one among them all. Even poor Maritornes, with her deplorable
morals, has a kind heart of her own and “some faint and distant
resemblance to a Christian about her;” and as for Sancho, though on
dissection we fail to find a lovable trait in him, unless it be a sort
of dog-like affection for his master, who is there that in his heart
does not love him?

But it is, after all, the humour of “Don Quixote” that distinguishes it
from all other books of the romance kind. It is this that makes it, as
one of the most judicial-minded of modern critics calls it, “the best
novel in the world beyond all comparison.” It is its varied humour,
ranging from broad farce to comedy as subtle as Shakespeare’s or
Molière’s that has naturalised it in every country where there are
readers, and made it a classic in every language that has a literature.



THE AUTHOR’S PREFACE

Idle reader: thou mayest believe me without any oath that I would this
book, as it is the child of my brain, were the fairest, gayest, and
cleverest that could be imagined. But I could not counteract Nature’s
law that everything shall beget its like; and what, then, could this
sterile, illtilled wit of mine beget but the story of a dry,
shrivelled, whimsical offspring, full of thoughts of all sorts and such
as never came into any other imagination—just what might be begotten in
a prison, where every misery is lodged and every doleful sound makes
its dwelling? Tranquillity, a cheerful retreat, pleasant fields, bright
skies, murmuring brooks, peace of mind, these are the things that go
far to make even the most barren muses fertile, and bring into the
world births that fill it with wonder and delight. Sometimes when a
father has an ugly, loutish son, the love he bears him so blindfolds
his eyes that he does not see his defects, or, rather, takes them for
gifts and charms of mind and body, and talks of them to his friends as
wit and grace. I, however—for though I pass for the father, I am but
the stepfather to “Don Quixote”—have no desire to go with the current
of custom, or to implore thee, dearest reader, almost with tears in my
eyes, as others do, to pardon or excuse the defects thou wilt perceive
in this child of mine. Thou art neither its kinsman nor its friend, thy
soul is thine own and thy will as free as any man’s, whate’er he be,
thou art in thine own house and master of it as much as the king of his
taxes and thou knowest the common saying, “Under my cloak I kill the
king;” all which exem