n a few words, or
in a single one, I may tell you I am Don Quixote of La Mancha,
otherwise called ‘The Knight of the Rueful Countenance;’ for though
self-praise is degrading, I must perforce sound my own sometimes, that
is to say, when there is no one at hand to do it for me. So that,
gentle sir, neither this horse, nor this lance, nor this shield, nor
this squire, nor all these arms put together, nor the sallowness of my
countenance, nor my gaunt leanness, will henceforth astonish you, now
that you know who I am and what profession I follow.”

With these words Don Quixote held his peace, and, from the time he took
to answer, the man in green seemed to be at a loss for a reply; after a
long pause, however, he said to him, “You were right when you saw
curiosity in my amazement, sir knight; but you have not succeeded in
removing the astonishment I feel at seeing you; for although you say,
señor, that knowing who you are ought to remove it, it has not done so;
on the contrary, now that I know, I am left more amazed and astonished
than before. What! is it possible that there are knights-errant in the
world in these days, and histories of real chivalry printed? I cannot
realise the fact that there can be anyone on earth now-a-days who aids
widows, or protects maidens, or defends wives, or succours orphans; nor
should I believe it had I not seen it in your worship with my own eyes.
Blessed be heaven! for by means of this history of your noble and
genuine chivalrous deeds, which you say has been printed, the countless
stories of fictitious knights-errant with which the world is filled, so
much to the injury of morality and the prejudice and discredit of good
histories, will have been driven into oblivion.”

“There is a good deal to be said on that point,” said Don Quixote, “as
to whether the histories of the knights-errant are fiction or not.”

“Why, is there anyone who doubts that those histories are false?” said
the man in green.

“I doubt it,” said Don Quixote, “but never mind that just now; if our
journey lasts long enough, I trust in God I shall show your worship
that you do wrong in going with the stream of those who regard it as a
matter of certainty that they are not true.”

From this last observation of Don Quixote’s, the traveller began to
have a suspicion that he was some crazy being, and was waiting for him
to confirm it by something further; but before they could turn to any
new subject Don Quixote begged him to tell him who he was, since he
himself had rendered account of his station and life. To this, he in
the green gaban replied “I, Sir Knight of the Rueful Countenance, am a
gentleman by birth, native of the village where, please God, we are
going to dine to-day; I am more than fairly well off, and my name is
Don Diego de Miranda. I pass my life with my wife, children, and
friends; my pursuits are hunting and fishing, but I keep neither hawks
nor greyhounds, nothing but a tame partridge or a bold ferret or two; I
have six dozen or so of books, some in our mother tongue, some Latin,
some of them history, others devotional; those of chivalry have not as
yet crossed the threshold of my door; I am more given to turning over
the profane than the devotional, so long as they are books of honest
entertainment that charm by their style and attract and interest by the
invention they display, though of these there are very few in Spain.
Sometimes I dine with my neighbours and friends, and often invite them;
my entertainments are neat and well served without stint of anything. I
have no taste for tattle, nor do I allow tattling in my presence; I pry
not into my neighbours’ lives, nor have I lynx-eyes for what others do.
I hear mass every day; I share my substance with the poor, making no
display of good works, lest I let hypocrisy and vainglory, those
enemies that subtly take possession of the most watchful heart, find an
entrance into mine. I strive to make peace be