ould like to know what three proverbs have just now come into thy
memory, for I have been turning over mine own—and it is a good one—and
none occurs to me.”

“What can be better,” said Sancho, “than ‘never put thy thumbs between
two back teeth;’ and ‘to “_get out of my house_” and “_what do you want
with my wife?_” there is no answer;’ and ‘whether the pitcher hits the
stone, or the stone the pitcher, it’s a bad business for the pitcher;’
all which fit to a hair? For no one should quarrel with his governor,
or him in authority over him, because he will come off the worst, as he
does who puts his finger between two back and if they are not back
teeth it makes no difference, so long as they are teeth; and to
whatever the governor may say there’s no answer, any more than to ‘get
out of my house’ and ‘what do you want with my wife?’ and then, as for
that about the stone and the pitcher, a blind man could see that. So
that he ‘who sees the mote in another’s eye had need to see the beam in
his own,’ that it be not said of himself, ‘the dead woman was
frightened at the one with her throat cut;’ and your worship knows well
that ‘the fool knows more in his own house than the wise man in
another’s.’”

“Nay, Sancho,” said Don Quixote, “the fool knows nothing, either in his
own house or in anybody else’s, for no wise structure of any sort can
stand on a foundation of folly; but let us say no more about it,
Sancho, for if thou governest badly, thine will be the fault and mine
the shame; but I comfort myself with having done my duty in advising
thee as earnestly and as wisely as I could; and thus I am released from
my obligations and my promise. God guide thee, Sancho, and govern thee
in thy government, and deliver me from the misgiving I have that thou
wilt turn the whole island upside down, a thing I might easily prevent
by explaining to the duke what thou art and telling him that all that
fat little person of thine is nothing else but a sack full of proverbs
and sauciness.”

“Señor,” said Sancho, “if your worship thinks I’m not fit for this
government, I give it up on the spot; for the mere black of the nail of
my soul is dearer to me than my whole body; and I can live just as
well, simple Sancho, on bread and onions, as governor, on partridges
and capons; and what’s more, while we’re asleep we’re all equal, great
and small, rich and poor. But if your worship looks into it, you will
see it was your worship alone that put me on to this business of
governing; for I know no more about the government of islands than a
buzzard; and if there’s any reason to think that because of my being a
governor the devil will get hold of me, I’d rather go Sancho to heaven
than governor to hell.”

“By God, Sancho,” said Don Quixote, “for those last words thou hast
uttered alone, I consider thou deservest to be governor of a thousand
islands. Thou hast good natural instincts, without which no knowledge
is worth anything; commend thyself to God, and try not to swerve in the
pursuit of thy main object; I mean, always make it thy aim and fixed
purpose to do right in all matters that come before thee, for heaven
always helps good intentions; and now let us go to dinner, for I think
my lord and lady are waiting for us.”



p43e.jpg (41K)



CHAPTER XLIV.
HOW SANCHO PANZA WAS CONDUCTED TO HIS GOVERNMENT, AND OF THE STRANGE
ADVENTURE THAT BEFELL DON QUIXOTE IN THE CASTLE




p44a.jpg (140K)

Full Size



It is stated, they say, in the true original of this history, that when
Cide Hamete came to write this chapter, his interpreter did not
translate it as he wrote it—that is, as a kind of complaint the Moor
made against himself for having taken in hand a story so dry and of so
little variety as this of Don Quixote, for he found himself forced to
speak perpetually of him and Sancho, without venturing to indulge in
digressions and episodes more serious and more interesting. He said,
too, t