f Saint Martin on his
horse, dividing his cloak with the beggar. The instant Don Quixote saw
it he said, “This knight too was one of the Christian adventurers, but
I believe he was generous rather than valiant, as thou mayest perceive,
Sancho, by his dividing his cloak with the beggar and giving him half
of it; no doubt it was winter at the time, for otherwise he would have
given him the whole of it, so charitable was he.”

“It was not that, most likely,” said Sancho, “but that he held with the
proverb that says, ‘For giving and keeping there’s need of brains.’”

Don Quixote laughed, and asked them to take off the next cloth,
underneath which was seen the image of the patron saint of the Spains
seated on horseback, his sword stained with blood, trampling on Moors
and treading heads underfoot; and on seeing it Don Quixote exclaimed,
“Ay, this is a knight, and of the squadrons of Christ! This one is
called Don Saint James the Moorslayer, one of the bravest saints and
knights the world ever had or heaven has now.”

They then raised another cloth which it appeared covered Saint Paul
falling from his horse, with all the details that are usually given in
representations of his conversion. When Don Quixote saw it, rendered in
such lifelike style that one would have said Christ was speaking and
Paul answering, “This,” he said, “was in his time the greatest enemy
that the Church of God our Lord had, and the greatest champion it will
ever have; a knight-errant in life, a steadfast saint in death, an
untiring labourer in the Lord’s vineyard, a teacher of the Gentiles,
whose school was heaven, and whose instructor and master was Jesus
Christ himself.”

There were no more images, so Don Quixote bade them cover them up
again, and said to those who had brought them, “I take it as a happy
omen, brothers, to have seen what I have; for these saints and knights
were of the same profession as myself, which is the calling of arms;
only there is this difference between them and me, that they were
saints, and fought with divine weapons, and I am a sinner and fight
with human ones. They won heaven by force of arms, for heaven suffereth
violence; and I, so far, know not what I have won by dint of my
sufferings; but if my Dulcinea del Toboso were to be released from
hers, perhaps with mended fortunes and a mind restored to itself I
might direct my steps in a better path than I am following at present.”

“May God hear and sin be deaf,” said Sancho to this.

The men were filled with wonder, as well at the figure as at the words
of Don Quixote, though they did not understand one half of what he
meant by them. They finished their dinner, took their images on their
backs, and bidding farewell to Don Quixote resumed their journey.

Sancho was amazed afresh at the extent of his master’s knowledge, as
much as if he had never known him, for it seemed to him that there was
no story or event in the world that he had not at his fingers’ ends and
fixed in his memory, and he said to him, “In truth, master mine, if
this that has happened to us to-day is to be called an adventure, it
has been one of the sweetest and pleasantest that have befallen us in
the whole course of our travels; we have come out of it unbelaboured
and undismayed, neither have we drawn sword nor have we smitten the
earth with our bodies, nor have we been left famishing; blessed be God
that he has let me see such a thing with my own eyes!”

“Thou sayest well, Sancho,” said Don Quixote, “but remember all times
are not alike nor do they always run the same way; and these things the
vulgar commonly call omens, which are not based upon any natural
reason, will by him who is wise be esteemed and reckoned happy
accidents merely. One of these believers in omens will get up of a
morning, leave his house, and meet a friar of the order of the blessed
Saint Francis, and, as if he had met a griffin, he will turn about and
go home. With another