not shift to and fro in her thoughts;
this is the truth, this is my opinion, and this is my advice.”

“And mine,” added Sancho; “for I never in all my life saw a lace-maker
that died for love; when damsels are at work their minds are more set
on finishing their tasks than on thinking of their loves. I speak from
my own experience; for when I’m digging I never think of my old woman;
I mean my Teresa Panza, whom I love better than my own eyelids.” “You
say well, Sancho,” said the duchess, “and I will take care that my
Altisidora employs herself henceforward in needlework of some sort; for
she is extremely expert at it.” “There is no occasion to have recourse
to that remedy, señora,” said Altisidora; “for the mere thought of the
cruelty with which this vagabond villain has treated me will suffice to
blot him out of my memory without any other device; with your
highness’s leave I will retire, not to have before my eyes, I won’t say
his rueful countenance, but his abominable, ugly looks.” “That reminds
me of the common saying, that ‘he that rails is ready to forgive,’”
said the duke.

Altisidora then, pretending to wipe away her tears with a handkerchief,
made an obeisance to her master and mistress and quitted the room.

“Ill luck betide thee, poor damsel,” said Sancho, “ill luck betide
thee! Thou hast fallen in with a soul as dry as a rush and a heart as
hard as oak; had it been me, i’faith ‘another cock would have crowed to
thee.’”

So the conversation came to an end, and Don Quixote dressed himself and
dined with the duke and duchess, and set out the same evening.



p70e.jpg (73K)

Full Size



CHAPTER LXXI.
OF WHAT PASSED BETWEEN DON QUIXOTE AND HIS SQUIRE SANCHO ON THE WAY TO
THEIR VILLAGE




p71a.jpg (82K)

Full Size



The vanquished and afflicted Don Quixote went along very downcast in
one respect and very happy in another. His sadness arose from his
defeat, and his satisfaction from the thought of the virtue that lay in
Sancho, as had been proved by the resurrection of Altisidora; though it
was with difficulty he could persuade himself that the love-smitten
damsel had been really dead. Sancho went along anything but cheerful,
for it grieved him that Altisidora had not kept her promise of giving
him the smocks; and turning this over in his mind he said to his
master, “Surely, señor, I’m the most unlucky doctor in the world;
there’s many a physician that, after killing the sick man he had to
cure, requires to be paid for his work, though it is only signing a bit
of a list of medicines, that the apothecary and not he makes up, and,
there, his labour is over; but with me though to cure somebody else
costs me drops of blood, smacks, pinches, pinproddings, and whippings,
nobody gives me a farthing. Well, I swear by all that’s good if they
put another patient into my hands, they’ll have to grease them for me
before I cure him; for, as they say, ‘it’s by his singing the abbot
gets his dinner,’ and I’m not going to believe that heaven has bestowed
upon me the virtue I have, that I should be dealing it out to others
all for nothing.”

“Thou art right, Sancho my friend,” said Don Quixote, “and Altisidora
has behaved very badly in not giving thee the smocks she promised; and
although that virtue of thine is _gratis data_—as it has cost thee no
study whatever, any more than such study as thy personal sufferings may
be—I can say for myself that if thou wouldst have payment for the
lashes on account of the disenchant of Dulcinea, I would have given it
to thee freely ere this. I am not sure, however, whether payment will
comport with the cure, and I would not have the reward interfere with
the medicine. I think there will be nothing lost by trying it; consider
how much thou wouldst have, Sancho, and whip thyself at once, and pay
thyself down with thine own hand, as thou hast money of mine.”

At this proposal Sancho opened his eyes and his ears a palm’s 