 that the whole
cave rang again.

“Famous testimony!” exclaimed Don Quixote; “I know that bray as well as
if I was its mother, and thy voice too, my Sancho. Wait while I go to
the duke’s castle, which is close by, and I will bring someone to take
thee out of this pit into which thy sins no doubt have brought thee.”

“Go, your worship,” said Sancho, “and come back quick for God’s sake;
for I cannot bear being buried alive any longer, and I’m dying of
fear.”

Don Quixote left him, and hastened to the castle to tell the duke and
duchess what had happened Sancho, and they were not a little astonished
at it; they could easily understand his having fallen, from the
confirmatory circumstance of the cave which had been in existence there
from time immemorial; but they could not imagine how he had quitted the
government without their receiving any intimation of his coming. To be
brief, they fetched ropes and tackle, as the saying is, and by dint of
many hands and much labour they drew up Dapple and Sancho Panza out of
the darkness into the light of day. A student who saw him remarked,
“That’s the way all bad governors should come out of their governments,
as this sinner comes out of the depths of the pit, dead with hunger,
pale, and I suppose without a farthing.”

Sancho overheard him and said, “It is eight or ten days, brother
growler, since I entered upon the government of the island they gave
me, and all that time I never had a bellyful of victuals, no not for an
hour; doctors persecuted me and enemies crushed my bones; nor had I any
opportunity of taking bribes or levying taxes; and if that be the case,
as it is, I don’t deserve, I think, to come out in this fashion; but
‘man proposes and God disposes;’ and God knows what is best, and what
suits each one best; and ‘as the occasion, so the behaviour;’ and ‘let
nobody say “I won’t drink of this water;”’ and ‘where one thinks there
are flitches, there are no pegs;’ God knows my meaning and that’s
enough; I say no more, though I could.”

“Be not angry or annoyed at what thou hearest, Sancho,” said Don
Quixote, “or there will never be an end of it; keep a safe conscience
and let them say what they like; for trying to stop slanderers’ tongues
is like trying to put gates to the open plain. If a governor comes out
of his government rich, they say he has been a thief; and if he comes
out poor, that he has been a noodle and a blockhead.”

“They’ll be pretty sure this time,” said Sancho, “to set me down for a
fool rather than a thief.”

Thus talking, and surrounded by boys and a crowd of people, they
reached the castle, where in one of the corridors the duke and duchess
stood waiting for them; but Sancho would not go up to see the duke
until he had first put up Dapple in the stable, for he said he had
passed a very bad night in his last quarters; then he went upstairs to
see his lord and lady, and kneeling before them he said, “Because it
was your highnesses’ pleasure, not because of any desert of my own, I
went to govern your island of Barataria, which ‘I entered naked, and
naked I find myself; I neither lose nor gain.’ Whether I have governed
well or ill, I have had witnesses who will say what they think fit. I
have answered questions, I have decided causes, and always dying of
hunger, for Doctor Pedro Recio of Tirteafuera, the island and governor
doctor, would have it so. Enemies attacked us by night and put us in a
great quandary, but the people of the island say they came off safe and
victorious by the might of my arm; and may God give them as much health
as there’s truth in what they say. In short, during that time I have
weighed the cares and responsibilities governing brings with it, and by
my reckoning I find my shoulders can’t bear them, nor are they a load
for my loins or arrows for my quiver; and so, before the government
threw me over I preferred to throw the government over; and yesterday
morning I left the islan