s that suggested his design of ruining me before mine
could be carried into effect. I told Don Fernando that all Luscinda’s
father was waiting for was that mine should ask her of him, which I did
not dare to suggest to him, fearing that he would not consent to do so;
not because he did not know perfectly well the rank, goodness, virtue,
and beauty of Luscinda, and that she had qualities that would do honour
to any family in Spain, but because I was aware that he did not wish me
to marry so soon, before seeing what the Duke Ricardo would do for me.
In short, I told him I did not venture to mention it to my father, as
well on account of that difficulty, as of many others that discouraged
me though I knew not well what they were, only that it seemed to me
that what I desired was never to come to pass. To all this Don Fernando
answered that he would take it upon himself to speak to my father, and
persuade him to speak to Luscinda’s father. O, ambitious Marius! O,
cruel Catiline! O, wicked Sylla! O, perfidious Ganelon! O, treacherous
Vellido! O, vindictive Julian! O, covetous Judas! Traitor, cruel,
vindictive, and perfidious, wherein had this poor wretch failed in his
fidelity, who with such frankness showed thee the secrets and the joys
of his heart? What offence did I commit? What words did I utter, or
what counsels did I give that had not the furtherance of thy honour and
welfare for their aim? But, woe is me, wherefore do I complain? for
sure it is that when misfortunes spring from the stars, descending from
on high they fall upon us with such fury and violence that no power on
earth can check their course nor human device stay their coming. Who
could have thought that Don Fernando, a highborn gentleman,
intelligent, bound to me by gratitude for my services, one that could
win the object of his love wherever he might set his affections, could
have become so obdurate, as they say, as to rob me of my one ewe lamb
that was not even yet in my possession? But laying aside these useless
and unavailing reflections, let us take up the broken thread of my
unhappy story.

“To proceed, then: Don Fernando finding my presence an obstacle to the
execution of his treacherous and wicked design, resolved to send me to
his elder brother under the pretext of asking money from him to pay for
six horses which, purposely, and with the sole object of sending me
away that he might the better carry out his infernal scheme, he had
purchased the very day he offered to speak to my father, and the price
of which he now desired me to fetch. Could I have anticipated this
treachery? Could I by any chance have suspected it? Nay; so far from
that, I offered with the greatest pleasure to go at once, in my
satisfaction at the good bargain that had been made. That night I spoke
with Luscinda, and told her what had been agreed upon with Don
Fernando, and how I had strong hopes of our fair and reasonable wishes
being realised. She, as unsuspicious as I was of the treachery of Don
Fernando, bade me try to return speedily, as she believed the
fulfilment of our desires would be delayed only so long as my father
put off speaking to hers. I know not why it was that on saying this to
me her eyes filled with tears, and there came a lump in her throat that
prevented her from uttering a word of many more that it seemed to me
she was striving to say to me. I was astonished at this unusual turn,
which I never before observed in her, for we always conversed, whenever
good fortune and my ingenuity gave us the chance, with the greatest
gaiety and cheerfulness, mingling tears, sighs, jealousies, doubts, or
fears with our words; it was all on my part a eulogy of my good fortune
that Heaven should have given her to me for my mistress; I glorified
her beauty, I extolled her worth and her understanding; and she paid me
back by praising in me what in her love for me she thought worthy of
praise; and besides we had a hundred thou