in everything;
and with that he went away to dinner and took Sancho along with him,
while the duke and duchess and Don Quixote remained at table discussing
a great variety of things, but all bearing on the calling of arms and
knight-errantry.

The duchess begged Don Quixote, as he seemed to have a retentive
memory, to describe and portray to her the beauty and features of the
lady Dulcinea del Toboso, for, judging by what fame trumpeted abroad of
her beauty, she felt sure she must be the fairest creature in the
world, nay, in all La Mancha.

Don Quixote sighed on hearing the duchess’s request, and said, “If I
could pluck out my heart, and lay it on a plate on this table here
before your highness’s eyes, it would spare my tongue the pain of
telling what can hardly be thought of, for in it your excellence would
see her portrayed in full. But why should I attempt to depict and
describe in detail, and feature by feature, the beauty of the peerless
Dulcinea, the burden being one worthy of other shoulders than mine, an
enterprise wherein the pencils of Parrhasius, Timantes, and Apelles,
and the graver of Lysippus ought to be employed, to paint it in
pictures and carve it in marble and bronze, and Ciceronian and
Demosthenian eloquence to sound its praises?”

“What does Demosthenian mean, Señor Don Quixote?” said the duchess; “it
is a word I never heard in all my life.”

“Demosthenian eloquence,” said Don Quixote, “means the eloquence of
Demosthenes, as Ciceronian means that of Cicero, who were the two most
eloquent orators in the world.”

“True,” said the duke; “you must have lost your wits to ask such a
question. Nevertheless, Señor Don Quixote would greatly gratify us if
he would depict her to us; for never fear, even in an outline or sketch
she will be something to make the fairest envious.”

“I would do so certainly,” said Don Quixote, “had she not been blurred
to my mind’s eye by the misfortune that fell upon her a short time
since, one of such a nature that I am more ready to weep over it than
to describe it. For your highnesses must know that, going a few days
back to kiss her hands and receive her benediction, approbation, and
permission for this third sally, I found her altogether a different
being from the one I sought; I found her enchanted and changed from a
princess into a peasant, from fair to foul, from an angel into a devil,
from fragrant to pestiferous, from refined to clownish, from a
dignified lady into a jumping tomboy, and, in a word, from Dulcinea del
Toboso into a coarse Sayago wench.”

“God bless me!” said the duke aloud at this, “who can have done the
world such an injury? Who can have robbed it of the beauty that
gladdened it, of the grace and gaiety that charmed it, of the modesty
that shed a lustre upon it?”

“Who?” replied Don Quixote; “who could it be but some malignant
enchanter of the many that persecute me out of envy—that accursed race
born into the world to obscure and bring to naught the achievements of
the good, and glorify and exalt the deeds of the wicked? Enchanters
have persecuted me, enchanters persecute me still, and enchanters will
continue to persecute me until they have sunk me and my lofty chivalry
in the deep abyss of oblivion; and they injure and wound me where they
know I feel it most. For to deprive a knight-errant of his lady is to
deprive him of the eyes he sees with, of the sun that gives him light,
of the food whereby he lives. Many a time before have I said it, and I
say it now once more, a knight-errant without a lady is like a tree
without leaves, a building without a foundation, or a shadow without
the body that causes it.”

“There is no denying it,” said the duchess; “but still, if we are to
believe the history of Don Quixote that has come out here lately with
general applause, it is to be inferred from it, if I mistake not, that
you never saw the lady Dulcinea, and that the said lady is nothing in
the wo