s opponent, and they will be able to run on equal terms.”

“By all that’s good,” said one of the peasants as he heard Sancho’s
decision, “but the gentleman has spoken like a saint, and given
judgment like a canon! But I’ll be bound the fat man won’t part with an
ounce of his flesh, not to say eleven stone.”

“The best plan will be for them not to run,” said another, “so that
neither the thin man break down under the weight, nor the fat one strip
himself of his flesh; let half the wager be spent in wine, and let’s
take these gentlemen to the tavern where there’s the best, and ‘over me
be the cloak when it rains.’”

“I thank you, sirs,” said Don Quixote; “but I cannot stop for an
instant, for sad thoughts and unhappy circumstances force me to seem
discourteous and to travel apace;” and spurring Rocinante he pushed on,
leaving them wondering at what they had seen and heard, at his own
strange figure and at the shrewdness of his servant, for such they took
Sancho to be; and another of them observed, “If the servant is so
clever, what must the master be? I’ll bet, if they are going to
Salamanca to study, they’ll come to be alcaldes of the Court in a
trice; for it’s a mere joke—only to read and read, and have interest
and good luck; and before a man knows where he is he finds himself with
a staff in his hand or a mitre on his head.”

That night master and man passed out in the fields in the open air, and
the next day as they were pursuing their journey they saw coming
towards them a man on foot with alforjas at the neck and a javelin or
spiked staff in his hand, the very cut of a foot courier; who, as soon
as he came close to Don Quixote, increased his pace and half running
came up to him, and embracing his right thigh, for he could reach no
higher, exclaimed with evident pleasure, “O Señor Don Quixote of La
Mancha, what happiness it will be to the heart of my lord the duke when
he knows your worship is coming back to his castle, for he is still
there with my lady the duchess!”

“I do not recognise you, friend,” said Don Quixote, “nor do I know who
you are, unless you tell me.”

“I am Tosilos, my lord the duke’s lacquey, Señor Don Quixote,” replied
the courier; “he who refused to fight your worship about marrying the
daughter of Doña Rodriguez.”

“God bless me!” exclaimed Don Quixote; “is it possible that you are the
one whom mine enemies the enchanters changed into the lacquey you speak
of in order to rob me of the honour of that battle?”

“Nonsense, good sir!” said the messenger; “there was no enchantment or
transformation at all; I entered the lists just as much lacquey Tosilos
as I came out of them lacquey Tosilos. I thought to marry without
fighting, for the girl had taken my fancy; but my scheme had a very
different result, for as soon as your worship had left the castle my
lord the duke had a hundred strokes of the stick given me for having
acted contrary to the orders he gave me before engaging in the combat;
and the end of the whole affair is that the girl has become a nun, and
Doña Rodriguez has gone back to Castile, and I am now on my way to
Barcelona with a packet of letters for the viceroy which my master is
sending him. If your worship would like a drop, sound though warm, I
have a gourd here full of the best, and some scraps of Tronchon cheese
that will serve as a provocative and wakener of your thirst if so be it
is asleep.”

“I take the offer,” said Sancho; “no more compliments about it; pour
out, good Tosilos, in spite of all the enchanters in the Indies.”

“Thou art indeed the greatest glutton in the world, Sancho,” said Don
Quixote, “and the greatest booby on earth, not to be able to see that
this courier is enchanted and this Tosilos a sham one; stop with him
and take thy fill; I will go on slowly and wait for thee to come up
with me.”

The lacquey laughed, unsheathed his gourd, unwalletted his scraps, and
taking out a small loaf of bread he