ing
for me there until I came. These directions I gave each one separately,
with orders that if they saw any other Christians there they were not
to say anything to them except that I had directed them to wait at that
spot.

This preliminary having been settled, another still more necessary step
had to be taken, which was to let Zoraida know how matters stood that
she might be prepared and forewarned, so as not to be taken by surprise
if we were suddenly to seize upon her before she thought the
Christians’ vessel could have returned. I determined, therefore, to go
to the garden and try if I could speak to her; and the day before my
departure I went there under the pretence of gathering herbs. The first
person I met was her father, who addressed me in the language that all
over Barbary and even in Constantinople is the medium between captives
and Moors, and is neither Morisco nor Castilian, nor of any other
nation, but a mixture of all languages, by means of which we can all
understand one another. In this sort of language, I say, he asked me
what I wanted in his garden, and to whom I belonged. I replied that I
was a slave of the Arnaut Mami (for I knew as a certainty that he was a
very great friend of his), and that I wanted some herbs to make a
salad. He asked me then whether I were on ransom or not, and what my
master demanded for me. While these questions and answers were
proceeding, the fair Zoraida, who had already perceived me some time
before, came out of the house in the garden, and as Moorish women are
by no means particular about letting themselves be seen by Christians,
or, as I have said before, at all coy, she had no hesitation in coming
to where her father stood with me; moreover her father, seeing her
approaching slowly, called to her to come. It would be beyond my power
now to describe to you the great beauty, the high-bred air, the
brilliant attire of my beloved Zoraida as she presented herself before
my eyes. I will content myself with saying that more pearls hung from
her fair neck, her ears, and her hair than she had hairs on her head.
On her ankles, which as is customary were bare, she had carcajes (for
so bracelets or anklets are called in Morisco) of the purest gold, set
with so many diamonds that she told me afterwards her father valued
them at ten thousand doubloons, and those she had on her wrists were
worth as much more. The pearls were in profusion and very fine, for the
highest display and adornment of the Moorish women is decking
themselves with rich pearls and seed-pearls; and of these there are
therefore more among the Moors than among any other people. Zoraida’s
father had to the reputation of possessing a great number, and the
purest in all Algiers, and of possessing also more than two hundred
thousand Spanish crowns; and she, who is now mistress of me only, was
mistress of all this. Whether thus adorned she would have been
beautiful or not, and what she must have been in her prosperity, may be
imagined from the beauty remaining to her after so many hardships; for,
as everyone knows, the beauty of some women has its times and its
seasons, and is increased or diminished by chance causes; and naturally
the emotions of the mind will heighten or impair it, though indeed more
frequently they totally destroy it. In a word she presented herself
before me that day attired with the utmost splendour, and supremely
beautiful; at any rate, she seemed to me the most beautiful object I
had ever seen; and when, besides, I thought of all I owed to her I felt
as though I had before me some heavenly being come to earth to bring me
relief and happiness.

As she approached her father told her in his own language that I was a
captive belonging to his friend the Arnaut Mami, and that I had come
for salad.

She took up the conversation, and in that mixture of tongues I have
spoken of she asked me if I was a gentleman, and why I was not
ransomed.

I ans