her arm from my neck, but on the contrary drew closer to me and
laid her head on my breast, bending her knees a little and showing all
the signs and tokens of fainting, while I at the same time made it seem
as though I were supporting her against my will. Her father came
running up to where we were, and seeing his daughter in this state
asked what was the matter with her; she, however, giving no answer, he
said, “No doubt she has fainted in alarm at the entrance of those
dogs,” and taking her from mine he drew her to his own breast, while
she sighing, her eyes still wet with tears, said again, “Ameji,
cristiano, ameji”—“Go, Christian, go.” To this her father replied,
“There is no need, daughter, for the Christian to go, for he has done
thee no harm, and the Turks have now gone; feel no alarm, there is
nothing to hurt thee, for as I say, the Turks at my request have gone
back the way they came.”



c41b.jpg (320K)

Full Size




“It was they who terrified her, as thou hast said, señor,” said I to
her father; “but since she tells me to go, I have no wish to displease
her: peace be with thee, and with thy leave I will come back to this
garden for herbs if need be, for my master says there are nowhere
better herbs for salad than here.”

“Come back for any thou hast need of,” replied Hadji Morato; “for my
daughter does not speak thus because she is displeased with thee or any
Christian: she only meant that the Turks should go, not thou; or that
it was time for thee to look for thy herbs.”

With this I at once took my leave of both; and she, looking as though
her heart were breaking, retired with her father. While pretending to
look for herbs I made the round of the garden at my ease, and studied
carefully all the approaches and outlets, and the fastenings of the
house and everything that could be taken advantage of to make our task
easy.



c41c.jpg (326K)

Full Size




Having done so I went and gave an account of all that had taken place
to the renegade and my comrades, and looked forward with impatience to
the hour when, all fear at an end, I should find myself in possession
of the prize which fortune held out to me in the fair and lovely
Zoraida. The time passed at length, and the appointed day we so longed
for arrived; and, all following out the arrangement and plan which,
after careful consideration and many a long discussion, we had decided
upon, we succeeded as fully as we could have wished; for on the Friday
following the day upon which I spoke to Zoraida in the garden, the
renegade anchored his vessel at nightfall almost opposite the spot
where she was. The Christians who were to row were ready and in hiding
in different places round about, all waiting for me, anxious and
elated, and eager to attack the vessel they had before their eyes; for
they did not know the renegade’s plan, but expected that they were to
gain their liberty by force of arms and by killing the Moors who were
on board the vessel. As soon, then, as I and my comrades made our
appearance, all those that were in hiding seeing us came and joined us.
It was now the time when the city gates are shut, and there was no one
to be seen in all the space outside. When we were collected together we
debated whether it would be better first to go for Zoraida, or to make
prisoners of the Moorish rowers who rowed in the vessel; but while we
were still uncertain our renegade came up asking us what kept us, as it
was now the time, and all the Moors were off their guard and most of
them asleep. We told him why we hesitated, but he said it was of more
importance first to secure the vessel, which could be done with the
greatest ease and without any danger, and then we could go for Zoraida.
We all approved of what he said, and so without further delay, guided
by him we made for the vessel, and he leaping on board first, drew his
cutlass and said in Morisco, “Let no one stir from this if he does not