t it is no wonder
thou dost not understand it, for thou art not bound to know Latin, like
some who pretend to know it and don’t.”

“Now they are tied,” said Sancho; “what are we to do next?”

“What?” said Don Quixote, “cross ourselves and weigh anchor; I mean,
embark and cut the moorings by which the bark is held;” and the bark
began to drift away slowly from the bank. But when Sancho saw himself
somewhere about two yards out in the river, he began to tremble and
give himself up for lost; but nothing distressed him more than hearing
Dapple bray and seeing Rocinante struggling to get loose, and said he
to his master, “Dapple is braying in grief at our leaving him, and
Rocinante is trying to escape and plunge in after us. O dear friends,
peace be with you, and may this madness that is taking us away from
you, turned into sober sense, bring us back to you.” And with this he
fell weeping so bitterly, that Don Quixote said to him, sharply and
angrily, “What art thou afraid of, cowardly creature? What art thou
weeping at, heart of butter-paste? Who pursues or molests thee, thou
soul of a tame mouse? What dost thou want, unsatisfied in the very
heart of abundance? Art thou, perchance, tramping barefoot over the
Riphaean mountains, instead of being seated on a bench like an archduke
on the tranquil stream of this pleasant river, from which in a short
space we shall come out upon the broad sea? But we must have already
emerged and gone seven hundred or eight hundred leagues; and if I had
here an astrolabe to take the altitude of the pole, I could tell thee
how many we have travelled, though either I know little, or we have
already crossed or shall shortly cross the equinoctial line which parts
the two opposite poles midway.”

“And when we come to that line your worship speaks of,” said Sancho,
“how far shall we have gone?”

“Very far,” said Don Quixote, “for of the three hundred and sixty
degrees that this terraqueous globe contains, as computed by Ptolemy,
the greatest cosmographer known, we shall have travelled one-half when
we come to the line I spoke of.”

“By God,” said Sancho, “your worship gives me a nice authority for what
you say, putrid Dolly something transmogrified, or whatever it is.”

Don Quixote laughed at the interpretation Sancho put upon “computed,”
and the name of the cosmographer Ptolemy, and said he, “Thou must know,
Sancho, that with the Spaniards and those who embark at Cadiz for the
East Indies, one of the signs they have to show them when they have
passed the equinoctial line I told thee of, is, that the lice die upon
everybody on board the ship, and not a single one is left, or to be
found in the whole vessel if they gave its weight in gold for it; so,
Sancho, thou mayest as well pass thy hand down thy thigh, and if thou
comest upon anything alive we shall be no longer in doubt; if not, then
we have crossed.”

“I don’t believe a bit of it,” said Sancho; “still, I’ll do as your
worship bids me; though I don’t know what need there is for trying
these experiments, for I can see with my own eyes that we have not
moved five yards away from the bank, or shifted two yards from where
the animals stand, for there are Rocinante and Dapple in the very same
place where we left them; and watching a point, as I do now, I swear by
all that’s good, we are not stirring or moving at the pace of an ant.”

“Try the test I told thee of, Sancho,” said Don Quixote, “and don’t
mind any other, for thou knowest nothing about colures, lines,
parallels, zodiacs, ecliptics, poles, solstices, equinoxes, planets,
signs, bearings, the measures of which the celestial and terrestrial
spheres are composed; if thou wert acquainted with all these things, or
any portion of them, thou wouldst see clearly how many parallels we
have cut, what signs we have seen, and what constellations we have left
behind and are now leaving behind. But again I tell thee, feel and
hunt, for I am cert