 for him. When dinner was over and the cloth removed, Anselmo told
Lothario to stay there with Camilla while he attended to some pressing
business, as he would return in an hour and a half. Camilla begged him
not to go, and Lothario offered to accompany him, but nothing could
persuade Anselmo, who on the contrary pressed Lothario to remain
waiting for him as he had a matter of great importance to discuss with
him. At the same time he bade Camilla not to leave Lothario alone until
he came back. In short he contrived to put so good a face on the
reason, or the folly, of his absence that no one could have suspected
it was a pretence.

Anselmo took his departure, and Camilla and Lothario were left alone at
the table, for the rest of the household had gone to dinner. Lothario
saw himself in the lists according to his friend’s wish, and facing an
enemy that could by her beauty alone vanquish a squadron of armed
knights; judge whether he had good reason to fear; but what he did was
to lean his elbow on the arm of the chair, and his cheek upon his hand,
and, asking Camilla’s pardon for his ill manners, he said he wished to
take a little sleep until Anselmo returned. Camilla in reply said he
could repose more at his ease in the reception-room than in his chair,
and begged of him to go in and sleep there; but Lothario declined, and
there he remained asleep until the return of Anselmo, who finding
Camilla in her own room, and Lothario asleep, imagined that he had
stayed away so long as to have afforded them time enough for
conversation and even for sleep, and was all impatience until Lothario
should wake up, that he might go out with him and question him as to
his success. Everything fell out as he wished; Lothario awoke, and the
two at once left the house, and Anselmo asked what he was anxious to
know, and Lothario in answer told him that he had not thought it
advisable to declare himself entirely the first time, and therefore had
only extolled the charms of Camilla, telling her that all the city
spoke of nothing else but her beauty and wit, for this seemed to him an
excellent way of beginning to gain her good-will and render her
disposed to listen to him with pleasure the next time, thus availing
himself of the device the devil has recourse to when he would deceive
one who is on the watch; for he being the angel of darkness transforms
himself into an angel of light, and, under cover of a fair seeming,
discloses himself at length, and effects his purpose if at the
beginning his wiles are not discovered. All this gave great
satisfaction to Anselmo, and he said he would afford the same
opportunity every day, but without leaving the house, for he would find
things to do at home so that Camilla should not detect the plot.

Thus, then, several days went by, and Lothario, without uttering a word
to Camilla, reported to Anselmo that he had talked with her and that he
had never been able to draw from her the slightest indication of
consent to anything dishonourable, nor even a sign or shadow of hope;
on the contrary, he said she would inform her husband of it.

“So far well,” said Anselmo; “Camilla has thus far resisted words; we
must now see how she will resist deeds. I will give you to-morrow two
thousand crowns in gold for you to offer or even present, and as many
more to buy jewels to lure her, for women are fond of being becomingly
attired and going gaily dressed, and all the more so if they are
beautiful, however chaste they may be; and if she resists this
temptation, I will rest satisfied and will give you no more trouble.”

Lothario replied that now he had begun he would carry on the
undertaking to the end, though he perceived he was to come out of it
wearied and vanquished. The next day he received the four thousand
crowns, and with them four thousand perplexities, for he knew not what
to say by way of a new falsehood; but in the end he made up his mind to
tell him that Cami