illy, stupid applicant, don’t be in a
hurry; wait for the proper time and season for doing business; don’t
come at dinner-hour, or at bed-time; for judges are only flesh and
blood, and must give to Nature what she naturally demands of them; all
except myself, for in my case I give her nothing to eat, thanks to
Señor Doctor Pedro Recio Tirteafuera here, who would have me die of
hunger, and declares that death to be life; and the same sort of life
may God give him and all his kind—I mean the bad doctors; for the good
ones deserve palms and laurels.”

All who knew Sancho Panza were astonished to hear him speak so
elegantly, and did not know what to attribute it to unless it were that
office and grave responsibility either smarten or stupefy men’s wits.
At last Doctor Pedro Recio Agilers of Tirteafuera promised to let him
have supper that night though it might be in contravention of all the
aphorisms of Hippocrates. With this the governor was satisfied and
looked forward to the approach of night and supper-time with great
anxiety; and though time, to his mind, stood still and made no
progress, nevertheless the hour he so longed for came, and they gave
him a beef salad with onions and some boiled calves’ feet rather far
gone. At this he fell to with greater relish than if they had given him
francolins from Milan, pheasants from Rome, veal from Sorrento,
partridges from Moron, or geese from Lavajos, and turning to the doctor
at supper he said to him, “Look here, señor doctor, for the future
don’t trouble yourself about giving me dainty things or choice dishes
to eat, for it will be only taking my stomach off its hinges; it is
accustomed to goat, cow, bacon, hung beef, turnips and onions; and if
by any chance it is given these palace dishes, it receives them
squeamishly, and sometimes with loathing. What the head-carver had best
do is to serve me with what they call ollas podridas (and the rottener
they are the better they smell); and he can put whatever he likes into
them, so long as it is good to eat, and I’ll be obliged to him, and
will requite him some day. But let nobody play pranks on me, for either
we are or we are not; let us live and eat in peace and good-fellowship,
for when God sends the dawn, he sends it for all. I mean to govern this
island without giving up a right or taking a bribe; let everyone keep
his eye open, and look out for the arrow; for I can tell them ‘the
devil’s in Cantillana,’ and if they drive me to it they’ll see
something that will astonish them. Nay! make yourself honey and the
flies eat you.”

“Of a truth, señor governor,” said the carver, “your worship is in the
right of it in everything you have said; and I promise you in the name
of all the inhabitants of this island that they will serve your worship
with all zeal, affection, and good-will, for the mild kind of
government you have given a sample of to begin with, leaves them no
ground for doing or thinking anything to your worship’s disadvantage.”

“That I believe,” said Sancho; “and they would be great fools if they
did or thought otherwise; once more I say, see to my feeding and my
Dapple’s for that is the great point and what is most to the purpose;
and when the hour comes let us go the rounds, for it is my intention to
purge this island of all manner of uncleanness and of all idle
good-for-nothing vagabonds; for I would have you know that lazy idlers
are the same thing in a State as the drones in a hive, that eat up the
honey the industrious bees make. I mean to protect the husbandman, to
preserve to the gentleman his privileges, to reward the virtuous, and
above all to respect religion and honour its ministers. What say you to
that, my friends? Is there anything in what I say, or am I talking to
no purpose?”

“There is so much in what your worship says, señor governor,” said the
majordomo, “that I am filled with wonder when I see a man like your
worship, entirely without learning (