hich he said to urge Señor Basilio to
abandon the practice of those accomplishments he was skilled in, for
though they brought him fame, they brought him no money, and apply
himself to the acquisition of wealth by legitimate industry, which will
never fail those who are prudent and persevering. The poor man who is a
man of honour (if indeed a poor man can be a man of honour) has a jewel
when he has a fair wife, and if she is taken from him, his honour is
taken from him and slain. The fair woman who is a woman of honour, and
whose husband is poor, deserves to be crowned with the laurels and
crowns of victory and triumph. Beauty by itself attracts the desires of
all who behold it, and the royal eagles and birds of towering flight
stoop on it as on a dainty lure; but if beauty be accompanied by want
and penury, then the ravens and the kites and other birds of prey
assail it, and she who stands firm against such attacks well deserves
to be called the crown of her husband. “Remember, O prudent Basilio,”
added Don Quixote, “it was the opinion of a certain sage, I know not
whom, that there was not more than one good woman in the whole world;
and his advice was that each one should think and believe that this one
good woman was his own wife, and in this way he would live happy. I
myself am not married, nor, so far, has it ever entered my thoughts to
be so; nevertheless I would venture to give advice to anyone who might
ask it, as to the mode in which he should seek a wife such as he would
be content to marry. The first thing I would recommend him, would be to
look to good name rather than to wealth, for a good woman does not win
a good name merely by being good, but by letting it be seen that she is
so, and open looseness and freedom do much more damage to a woman’s
honour than secret depravity. If you take a good woman into your house
it will be an easy matter to keep her good, and even to make her still
better; but if you take a bad one you will find it hard work to mend
her, for it is no very easy matter to pass from one extreme to another.
I do not say it is impossible, but I look upon it as difficult.”

Sancho, listening to all this, said to himself, “This master of mine,
when I say anything that has weight and substance, says I might take a
pulpit in hand, and go about the world preaching fine sermons; but I
say of him that, when he begins stringing maxims together and giving
advice not only might he take a pulpit in hand, but two on each finger,
and go into the market-places to his heart’s content. Devil take you
for a knight-errant, what a lot of things you know! I used to think in
my heart that the only thing he knew was what belonged to his chivalry;
but there is nothing he won’t have a finger in.”

Sancho muttered this somewhat aloud, and his master overheard him, and
asked, “What art thou muttering there, Sancho?”

“I’m not saying anything or muttering anything,” said Sancho; “I was
only saying to myself that I wish I had heard what your worship has
said just now before I married; perhaps I’d say now, ‘The ox that’s
loose licks himself well.’”

“Is thy Teresa so bad then, Sancho?”

“She is not very bad,” replied Sancho; “but she is not very good; at
least she is not as good as I could wish.”

“Thou dost wrong, Sancho,” said Don Quixote, “to speak ill of thy wife;
for after all she is the mother of thy children.” “We are quits,”
returned Sancho; “for she speaks ill of me whenever she takes it into
her head, especially when she is jealous; and Satan himself could not
put up with her then.”

In fine, they remained three days with the newly married couple, by
whom they were entertained and treated like kings. Don Quixote begged
the fencing licentiate to find him a guide to show him the way to the
cave of Montesinos, as he had a great desire to enter it and see with
his own eyes if the wonderful tales that were told of it all over the
country were true. The licen