and a great hubbub in the palace,
and Sancho burst abruptly into the room all glowing with anger, with a
straining-cloth by way of a bib, and followed by several servants, or,
more properly speaking, kitchen-boys and other underlings, one of whom
carried a small trough full of water, that from its colour and impurity
was plainly dishwater. The one with the trough pursued him and followed
him everywhere he went, endeavouring with the utmost persistence to
thrust it under his chin, while another kitchen-boy seemed anxious to
wash his beard.

“What is all this, brothers?” asked the duchess. “What is it? What do
you want to do to this good man? Do you forget he is a governor-elect?”

To which the barber kitchen-boy replied, “The gentleman will not let
himself be washed as is customary, and as my lord and the señor his
master have been.”

“Yes, I will,” said Sancho, in a great rage; “but I’d like it to be
with cleaner towels, clearer lye, and not such dirty hands; for there’s
not so much difference between me and my master that he should be
washed with angels’ water and I with devil’s lye. The customs of
countries and princes’ palaces are only good so long as they give no
annoyance; but the way of washing they have here is worse than doing
penance. I have a clean beard, and I don’t require to be refreshed in
that fashion, and whoever comes to wash me or touch a hair of my head,
I mean to say my beard, with all due respect be it said, I’ll give him
a punch that will leave my fist sunk in his skull; for cirimonies and
soapings of this sort are more like jokes than the polite attentions of
one’s host.”

The duchess was ready to die with laughter when she saw Sancho’s rage
and heard his words; but it was no pleasure to Don Quixote to see him
in such a sorry trim, with the dingy towel about him, and the
hangers-on of the kitchen all round him; so making a low bow to the
duke and duchess, as if to ask their permission to speak, he addressed
the rout in a dignified tone: “Holloa, gentlemen! you let that youth
alone, and go back to where you came from, or anywhere else if you
like; my squire is as clean as any other person, and those troughs are
as bad as narrow thin-necked jars to him; take my advice and leave him
alone, for neither he nor I understand joking.”

Sancho took the word out of his mouth and went on, “Nay, let them come
and try their jokes on the country bumpkin, for it’s about as likely
I’ll stand them as that it’s now midnight! Let them bring me a comb
here, or what they please, and curry this beard of mine, and if they
get anything out of it that offends against cleanliness, let them clip
me to the skin.”

Upon this, the duchess, laughing all the while, said, “Sancho Panza is
right, and always will be in all he says; he is clean, and, as he says
himself, he does not require to be washed; and if our ways do not
please him, he is free to choose. Besides, you promoters of cleanliness
have been excessively careless and thoughtless, I don’t know if I ought
not to say audacious, to bring troughs and wooden utensils and kitchen
dishclouts, instead of basins and jugs of pure gold and towels of
holland, to such a person and such a beard; but, after all, you are
ill-conditioned and ill-bred, and spiteful as you are, you cannot help
showing the grudge you have against the squires of knights-errant.”

The impudent servitors, and even the seneschal who came with them, took
the duchess to be speaking in earnest, so they removed the
straining-cloth from Sancho’s neck, and with something like shame and
confusion of face went off all of them and left him; whereupon he,
seeing himself safe out of that extreme danger, as it seemed to him,
ran and fell on his knees before the duchess, saying, “From great
ladies great favours may be looked for; this which your grace has done
me to-day cannot be requited with less than wishing I was dubbed a
knight-errant, to devote myself all th