your dexterity with those foils
you carry than on dexterity of tongue,” said the other student, “you
would have been head of the degrees, where you are now tail.”

“Look here, bachelor Corchuelo,” returned the licentiate, “you have the
most mistaken idea in the world about skill with the sword, if you
think it useless.”

“It is no idea on my part, but an established truth,” replied
Corchuelo; “and if you wish me to prove it to you by experiment, you
have swords there, and it is a good opportunity; I have a steady hand
and a strong arm, and these joined with my resolution, which is not
small, will make you confess that I am not mistaken. Dismount and put
in practice your positions and circles and angles and science, for I
hope to make you see stars at noonday with my rude raw swordsmanship,
in which, next to God, I place my trust that the man is yet to be born
who will make me turn my back, and that there is not one in the world I
will not compel to give ground.”

“As to whether you turn your back or not, I do not concern myself,”
replied the master of fence; “though it might be that your grave would
be dug on the spot where you planted your foot the first time; I mean
that you would be stretched dead there for despising skill with the
sword.”

“We shall soon see,” replied Corchuelo, and getting off his ass
briskly, he drew out furiously one of the swords the licentiate carried
on his beast.

“It must not be that way,” said Don Quixote at this point; “I will be
the director of this fencing match, and judge of this often disputed
question;” and dismounting from Rocinante and grasping his lance, he
planted himself in the middle of the road, just as the licentiate, with
an easy, graceful bearing and step, advanced towards Corchuelo, who
came on against him, darting fire from his eyes, as the saying is. The
other two of the company, the peasants, without dismounting from their
asses, served as spectators of the mortal tragedy. The cuts, thrusts,
down strokes, back strokes and doubles, that Corchuelo delivered were
past counting, and came thicker than hops or hail. He attacked like an
angry lion, but he was met by a tap on the mouth from the button of the
licentiate’s sword that checked him in the midst of his furious onset,
and made him kiss it as if it were a relic, though not as devoutly as
relics are and ought to be kissed. The end of it was that the
licentiate reckoned up for him by thrusts every one of the buttons of
the short cassock he wore, tore the skirts into strips, like the tails
of a cuttlefish, knocked off his hat twice, and so completely tired him
out, that in vexation, anger, and rage, he took the sword by the hilt
and flung it away with such force, that one of the peasants that were
there, who was a notary, and who went for it, made an affidavit
afterwards that he sent it nearly three-quarters of a league, which
testimony will serve, and has served, to show and establish with all
certainty that strength is overcome by skill.

Corchuelo sat down wearied, and Sancho approaching him said, “By my
faith, señor bachelor, if your worship takes my advice, you will never
challenge anyone to fence again, only to wrestle and throw the bar, for
you have the youth and strength for that; but as for these fencers as
they call them, I have heard say they can put the point of a sword
through the eye of a needle.”

“I am satisfied with having tumbled off my donkey,” said Corchuelo,
“and with having had the truth I was so ignorant of proved to me by
experience;” and getting up he embraced the licentiate, and they were
better friends than ever; and not caring to wait for the notary who had
gone for the sword, as they saw he would be a long time about it, they
resolved to push on so as to reach the village of Quiteria, to which
they all belonged, in good time.

During the remainder of the journey the licentiate held forth to them
on the excellences of the sword, with 