. The curate promised
to comply with his request carefully, and they embraced once more, and
renewed their promises.

The landlord approached the curate and handed him some papers, saying
he had discovered them in the lining of the valise in which the novel
of “The Ill-advised Curiosity” had been found, and that he might take
them all away with him as their owner had not since returned; for, as
he could not read, he did not want them himself. The curate thanked
him, and opening them he saw at the beginning of the manuscript the
words, “Novel of Rinconete and Cortadillo,” by which he perceived that
it was a novel, and as that of “The Ill-advised Curiosity” had been
good he concluded this would be so too, as they were both probably by
the same author; so he kept it, intending to read it when he had an
opportunity. He then mounted and his friend the barber did the same,
both masked, so as not to be recognised by Don Quixote, and set out
following in the rear of the cart. The order of march was this: first
went the cart with the owner leading it; at each side of it marched the
officers of the Brotherhood, as has been said, with their muskets; then
followed Sancho Panza on his ass, leading Rocinante by the bridle; and
behind all came the curate and the barber on their mighty mules, with
faces covered, as aforesaid, and a grave and serious air, measuring
their pace to suit the slow steps of the oxen. Don Quixote was seated
in the cage, with his hands tied and his feet stretched out, leaning
against the bars as silent and as patient as if he were a stone statue
and not a man of flesh. Thus slowly and silently they made, it might
be, two leagues, until they reached a valley which the carter thought a
convenient place for resting and feeding his oxen, and he said so to
the curate, but the barber was of opinion that they ought to push on a
little farther, as at the other side of a hill which appeared close by
he knew there was a valley that had more grass and much better than the
one where they proposed to halt; and his advice was taken and they
continued their journey.

Just at that moment the curate, looking back, saw coming on behind them
six or seven mounted men, well found and equipped, who soon overtook
them, for they were travelling, not at the sluggish, deliberate pace of
oxen, but like men who rode canons’ mules, and in haste to take their
noontide rest as soon as possible at the inn which was in sight not a
league off. The quick travellers came up with the slow, and courteous
salutations were exchanged; and one of the new comers, who was, in
fact, a canon of Toledo and master of the others who accompanied him,
observing the regular order of the procession, the cart, the officers,
Sancho, Rocinante, the curate and the barber, and above all Don Quixote
caged and confined, could not help asking what was the meaning of
carrying the man in that fashion; though, from the badges of the
officers, he already concluded that he must be some desperate
highwayman or other malefactor whose punishment fell within the
jurisdiction of the Holy Brotherhood. One of the officers to whom he
had put the question, replied, “Let the gentleman himself tell you the
meaning of his going this way, señor, for we do not know.”

Don Quixote overheard the conversation and said, “Haply, gentlemen, you
are versed and learned in matters of errant chivalry? Because if you
are I will tell you my misfortunes; if not, there is no good in my
giving myself the trouble of relating them;” but here the curate and
the barber, seeing that the travellers were engaged in conversation
with Don Quixote, came forward, in order to answer in such a way as to
save their stratagem from being discovered.

The canon, replying to Don Quixote, said, “In truth, brother, I know
more about books of chivalry than I do about Villalpando’s elements of
logic; so if that be all, you may safely tell me what you please.”

“In God’s