ave him
a loving kiss on the forehead, and said to him, not without tears in
his eyes, “Come along, comrade and friend and partner of my toils and
sorrows; when I was with you and had no cares to trouble me except
mending your harness and feeding your little carcass, happy were my
hours, my days, and my years; but since I left you, and mounted the
towers of ambition and pride, a thousand miseries, a thousand troubles,
and four thousand anxieties have entered into my soul;” and all the
while he was speaking in this strain he was fixing the pack-saddle on
the ass, without a word from anyone. Then having Dapple saddled, he,
with great pain and difficulty, got up on him, and addressing himself
to the majordomo, the secretary, the head-carver, and Pedro Recio the
doctor and several others who stood by, he said, “Make way, gentlemen,
and let me go back to my old freedom; let me go look for my past life,
and raise myself up from this present death. I was not born to be a
governor or protect islands or cities from the enemies that choose to
attack them. Ploughing and digging, vinedressing and pruning, are more
in my way than defending provinces or kingdoms. Saint Peter is very
well at Rome; I mean each of us is best following the trade he was born
to. A reaping-hook fits my hand better than a governor’s sceptre; I’d
rather have my fill of gazpacho than be subject to the misery of a
meddling doctor who kills me with hunger, and I’d rather lie in summer
under the shade of an oak, and in winter wrap myself in a double
sheepskin jacket in freedom, than go to bed between holland sheets and
dress in sables under the restraint of a government. God be with your
worships, and tell my lord the duke that ‘naked I was born, naked I
find myself, I neither lose nor gain;’ I mean that without a farthing I
came into this government, and without a farthing I go out of it, very
different from the way governors commonly leave other islands. Stand
aside and let me go; I have to plaster myself, for I believe every one
of my ribs is crushed, thanks to the enemies that have been trampling
over me to-night.”

“That is unnecessary, señor governor,” said Doctor Recio, “for I will
give your worship a draught against falls and bruises that will soon
make you as sound and strong as ever; and as for your diet I promise
your worship to behave better, and let you eat plentifully of whatever
you like.”

“You spoke late,” said Sancho. “I’d as soon turn Turk as stay any
longer. Those jokes won’t pass a second time. By God I’d as soon remain
in this government, or take another, even if it was offered me between
two plates, as fly to heaven without wings. I am of the breed of the
Panzas, and they are every one of them obstinate, and if they once say
‘odds,’ odds it must be, no matter if it is evens, in spite of all the
world. Here in this stable I leave the ant’s wings that lifted me up
into the air for the swifts and other birds to eat me, and let’s take
to level ground and our feet once more; and if they’re not shod in
pinked shoes of cordovan, they won’t want for rough sandals of hemp;
‘every ewe to her like,’ ‘and let no one stretch his leg beyond the
length of the sheet;’ and now let me pass, for it’s growing late with
me.”

To this the majordomo said, “Señor governor, we would let your worship
go with all our hearts, though it sorely grieves us to lose you, for
your wit and Christian conduct naturally make us regret you; but it is
well known that every governor, before he leaves the place where he has
been governing, is bound first of all to render an account. Let your
worship do so for the ten days you have held the government, and then
you may go and the peace of God go with you.”

“No one can demand it of me,” said Sancho, “but he whom my lord the
duke shall appoint; I am going to meet him, and to him I will render an
exact one; besides, when I go forth naked as I do, there is no other
proof needed 