goats
over the pleasant fields there, and the instant I beheld them I knew
one to be the peerless Dulcinea del Toboso, and the other two those
same country girls that were with her and that we spoke to on the road
from El Toboso! I asked Montesinos if he knew them, and he told me he
did not, but he thought they must be some enchanted ladies of
distinction, for it was only a few days before that they had made their
appearance in those meadows; but I was not to be surprised at that,
because there were a great many other ladies there of times past and
present, enchanted in various strange shapes, and among them he had
recognised Queen Guinevere and her dame Quintañona, she who poured out
the wine for Lancelot when he came from Britain.”

When Sancho Panza heard his master say this he was ready to take leave
of his senses, or die with laughter; for, as he knew the real truth
about the pretended enchantment of Dulcinea, in which he himself had
been the enchanter and concocter of all the evidence, he made up his
mind at last that, beyond all doubt, his master was out of his wits and
stark mad, so he said to him, “It was an evil hour, a worse season, and
a sorrowful day, when your worship, dear master mine, went down to the
other world, and an unlucky moment when you met with Señor Montesinos,
who has sent you back to us like this. You were well enough here above
in your full senses, such as God had given you, delivering maxims and
giving advice at every turn, and not as you are now, talking the
greatest nonsense that can be imagined.”

“As I know thee, Sancho,” said Don Quixote, “I heed not thy words.”

“Nor I your worship’s,” said Sancho, “whether you beat me or kill me
for those I have spoken, and will speak if you don’t correct and mend
your own. But tell me, while we are still at peace, how or by what did
you recognise the lady our mistress; and if you spoke to her, what did
you say, and what did she answer?”

“I recognised her,” said Don Quixote, “by her wearing the same garments
she wore when thou didst point her out to me. I spoke to her, but she
did not utter a word in reply; on the contrary, she turned her back on
me and took to flight, at such a pace that crossbow bolt could not have
overtaken her. I wished to follow her, and would have done so had not
Montesinos recommended me not to take the trouble as it would be
useless, particularly as the time was drawing near when it would be
necessary for me to quit the cavern. He told me, moreover, that in
course of time he would let me know how he and Belerma, and Durandarte,
and all who were there, were to be disenchanted. But of all I saw and
observed down there, what gave me most pain was, that while Montesinos
was speaking to me, one of the two companions of the hapless Dulcinea
approached me on one without my having seen her coming, and with tears
in her eyes said to me, in a low, agitated voice, ‘My lady Dulcinea del
Toboso kisses your worship’s hands, and entreats you to do her the
favour of letting her know how you are; and, being in great need, she
also entreats your worship as earnestly as she can to be so good as to
lend her half a dozen reals, or as much as you may have about you, on
this new dimity petticoat that I have here; and she promises to repay
them very speedily.’ I was amazed and taken aback by such a message,
and turning to Señor Montesinos I asked him, ‘Is it possible, Señor
Montesinos, that persons of distinction under enchantment can be in
need?’ To which he replied, ‘Believe me, Señor Don Quixote, that which
is called need is to be met with everywhere, and penetrates all
quarters and reaches everyone, and does not spare even the enchanted;
and as the lady Dulcinea del Toboso sends to beg those six reals, and
the pledge is to all appearance a good one, there is nothing for it but
to give them to her, for no doubt she must be in some great strait.’ ‘I
will take no pledge of her,’ I replied, ‘no