ed. But what made him
still more fortunate, as he said himself, was having a daughter of such
exceeding beauty, rare intelligence, gracefulness, and virtue, that
everyone who knew her and beheld her marvelled at the extraordinary
gifts with which heaven and nature had endowed her. As a child she was
beautiful, she continued to grow in beauty, and at the age of sixteen
she was most lovely. The fame of her beauty began to spread abroad
through all the villages around—but why do I say the villages around,
merely, when it spread to distant cities, and even made its way into
the halls of royalty and reached the ears of people of every class, who
came from all sides to see her as if to see something rare and curious,
or some wonder-working image?

Her father watched over her and she watched over herself; for there are
no locks, or guards, or bolts that can protect a young girl better than
her own modesty. The wealth of the father and the beauty of the
daughter led many neighbours as well as strangers to seek her for a
wife; but he, as one might well be who had the disposal of so rich a
jewel, was perplexed and unable to make up his mind to which of her
countless suitors he should entrust her. I was one among the many who
felt a desire so natural, and, as her father knew who I was, and I was
of the same town, of pure blood, in the bloom of life, and very rich in
possessions, I had great hopes of success. There was another of the
same place and qualifications who also sought her, and this made her
father’s choice hang in the balance, for he felt that on either of us
his daughter would be well bestowed; so to escape from this state of
perplexity he resolved to refer the matter to Leandra (for that is the
name of the rich damsel who has reduced me to misery), reflecting that
as we were both equal it would be best to leave it to his dear daughter
to choose according to her inclination—a course that is worthy of
imitation by all fathers who wish to settle their children in life. I
do not mean that they ought to leave them to make a choice of what is
contemptible and bad, but that they should place before them what is
good and then allow them to make a good choice as they please. I do not
know which Leandra chose; I only know her father put us both off with
the tender age of his daughter and vague words that neither bound him
nor dismissed us. My rival is called Anselmo and I myself Eugenio—that
you may know the names of the personages that figure in this tragedy,
the end of which is still in suspense, though it is plain to see it
must be disastrous.

About this time there arrived in our town one Vicente de la Roca, the
son of a poor peasant of the same town, the said Vicente having
returned from service as a soldier in Italy and divers other parts. A
captain who chanced to pass that way with his company had carried him
off from our village when he was a boy of about twelve years, and now
twelve years later the young man came back in a soldier’s uniform,
arrayed in a thousand colours, and all over glass trinkets and fine
steel chains. To-day he would appear in one gay dress, to-morrow in
another; but all flimsy and gaudy, of little substance and less worth.
The peasant folk, who are naturally malicious, and when they have
nothing to do can be malice itself, remarked all this, and took note of
his finery and jewellery, piece by piece, and discovered that he had
three suits of different colours, with garters and stockings to match;
but he made so many arrangements and combinations out of them, that if
they had not counted them, anyone would have sworn that he had made a
display of more than ten suits of clothes and twenty plumes. Do not
look upon all this that I am telling you about the clothes as uncalled
for or spun out, for they have a great deal to do with the story. He
used to seat himself on a bench under the great poplar in our plaza,
and there he would keep us all hanging op