

“I cannot stop, señor,” answered the man; “for the arms you see I carry
here are to be used to-morrow, so I must not delay; God be with you.
But if you want to know what I am carrying them for, I mean to lodge
to-night at the inn that is beyond the hermitage, and if you be going
the same road you will find me there, and I will tell you some curious
things; once more God be with you;” and he urged on his mule at such a
pace that Don Quixote had no time to ask him what these curious things
were that he meant to tell them; and as he was somewhat inquisitive,
and always tortured by his anxiety to learn something new, he decided
to set out at once, and go and pass the night at the inn instead of
stopping at the hermitage, where the cousin would have had them halt.
Accordingly they mounted and all three took the direct road for the
inn, which they reached a little before nightfall. On the road the
cousin proposed they should go up to the hermitage to drink a sup. The
instant Sancho heard this he steered his Dapple towards it, and Don
Quixote and the cousin did the same; but it seems Sancho’s bad luck so
ordered it that the hermit was not at home, for so a sub-hermit they
found in the hermitage told them. They called for some of the best. She
replied that her master had none, but that if they liked cheap water
she would give it with great pleasure.

“If I found any in water,” said Sancho, “there are wells along the road
where I could have had enough of it. Ah, Camacho’s wedding, and
plentiful house of Don Diego, how often do I miss you!”

Leaving the hermitage, they pushed on towards the inn, and a little
farther they came upon a youth who was pacing along in front of them at
no great speed, so that they overtook him. He carried a sword over his
shoulder, and slung on it a budget or bundle of his clothes apparently,
probably his breeches or pantaloons, and his cloak and a shirt or two;
for he had on a short jacket of velvet with a gloss like satin on it in
places, and had his shirt out; his stockings were of silk, and his
shoes square-toed as they wear them at court. His age might have been
eighteen or nineteen; he was of a merry countenance, and to all
appearance of an active habit, and he went along singing seguidillas to
beguile the wearisomeness of the road. As they came up with him he was
just finishing one, which the cousin got by heart and they say ran
thus—

I’m off to the wars
For the want of pence,
Oh, had I but money
I’d show more sense.


The first to address him was Don Quixote, who said, “You travel very
airily, sir gallant; whither bound, may we ask, if it is your pleasure
to tell us?”

To which the youth replied, “The heat and my poverty are the reason of
my travelling so airily, and it is to the wars that I am bound.”

“How poverty?” asked Don Quixote; “the heat one can understand.”

“Señor,” replied the youth, “in this bundle I carry velvet pantaloons
to match this jacket; if I wear them out on the road, I shall not be
able to make a decent appearance in them in the city, and I have not
the wherewithal to buy others; and so for this reason, as well as to
keep myself cool, I am making my way in this fashion to overtake some
companies of infantry that are not twelve leagues off, in which I shall
enlist, and there will be no want of baggage trains to travel with
after that to the place of embarkation, which they say will be
Carthagena; I would rather have the King for a master, and serve him in
the wars, than serve a court pauper.”

“And did you get any bounty, now?” asked the cousin.

“If I had been in the service of some grandee of Spain or personage of
distinction,” replied the youth, “I should have been safe to get it;
for that is the advantage of serving good masters, that out of the
servants’ hall men come to be ancients or captains, or get a good
pension. But I, to my misfortune, always served place-hunters and
adventurers, whose keep an