

As for him, coming out upon the high road, he made for El Toboso, and
the next day reached the inn where the mishap of the blanket had
befallen him. As soon as he recognised it he felt as if he were once
more living through the air, and he could not bring himself to enter it
though it was an hour when he might well have done so, for it was
dinner-time, and he longed to taste something hot as it had been all
cold fare with him for many days past. This craving drove him to draw
near to the inn, still undecided whether to go in or not, and as he was
hesitating there came out two persons who at once recognised him, and
said one to the other:

“Señor licentiate, is not he on the horse there Sancho Panza who, our
adventurer’s housekeeper told us, went off with her master as esquire?”

“So it is,” said the licentiate, “and that is our friend Don Quixote’s
horse;” and if they knew him so well it was because they were the
curate and the barber of his own village, the same who had carried out
the scrutiny and sentence upon the books; and as soon as they
recognised Sancho Panza and Rocinante, being anxious to hear of Don
Quixote, they approached, and calling him by his name the curate said,
“Friend Sancho Panza, where is your master?”

Sancho recognised them at once, and determined to keep secret the place
and circumstances where and under which he had left his master, so he
replied that his master was engaged in a certain quarter on a certain
matter of great importance to him which he could not disclose for the
eyes in his head.

“Nay, nay,” said the barber, “if you don’t tell us where he is, Sancho
Panza, we will suspect as we suspect already, that you have murdered
and robbed him, for here you are mounted on his horse; in fact, you
must produce the master of the hack, or else take the consequences.”

“There is no need of threats with me,” said Sancho, “for I am not a man
to rob or murder anybody; let his own fate, or God who made him, kill
each one; my master is engaged very much to his taste doing penance in
the midst of these mountains;” and then, offhand and without stopping,
he told them how he had left him, what adventures had befallen him, and
how he was carrying a letter to the lady Dulcinea del Toboso, the
daughter of Lorenzo Corchuelo, with whom he was over head and ears in
love. They were both amazed at what Sancho Panza told them; for though
they were aware of Don Quixote’s madness and the nature of it, each
time they heard of it they were filled with fresh wonder. They then
asked Sancho Panza to show them the letter he was carrying to the lady
Dulcinea del Toboso. He said it was written in a notebook, and that his
master’s directions were that he should have it copied on paper at the
first village he came to. On this the curate said if he showed it to
him, he himself would make a fair copy of it. Sancho put his hand into
his bosom in search of the notebook but could not find it, nor, if he
had been searching until now, could he have found it, for Don Quixote
had kept it, and had never given it to him, nor had he himself thought
of asking for it. When Sancho discovered he could not find the book his
face grew deadly pale, and in great haste he again felt his body all
over, and seeing plainly it was not to be found, without more ado he
seized his beard with both hands and plucked away half of it, and then,
as quick as he could and without stopping, gave himself half a dozen
cuffs on the face and nose till they were bathed in blood.

Seeing this, the curate and the barber asked him what had happened him
that he gave himself such rough treatment.

“What should happen to me?” replied Sancho, “but to have lost from one
hand to the other, in a moment, three ass-colts, each of them like a
castle?”

“How is that?” said the barber.

“I have lost the notebook,” said Sancho, “that contained the letter to
Dulcinea, and an order signed by my master in which he direct