er of them standing by, and in spite of all this I verily
believed and thought that what I saw and handled was all a dream; for
who could have thought that a goatherd would come to be a governor of
islands? Thou knowest, my friend, what my mother used to say, that one
must live long to see much; I say it because I expect to see more if I
live longer; for I don’t expect to stop until I see thee a farmer of
taxes or a collector of revenue, which are offices where, though the
devil carries off those who make a bad use of them, still they make and
handle money. My lady the duchess will tell thee the desire I have to
go to the Court; consider the matter and let me know thy pleasure; I
will try to do honour to thee by going in a coach.
    Neither the curate, nor the barber, nor the bachelor, nor even the
    sacristan, can believe that thou art a governor, and they say the
    whole thing is a delusion or an enchantment affair, like everything
    belonging to thy master Don Quixote; and Samson says he must go in
    search of thee and drive the government out of thy head and the
    madness out of Don Quixote’s skull; I only laugh, and look at my
    string of beads, and plan out the dress I am going to make for our
    daughter out of thy suit. I sent some acorns to my lady the
    duchess; I wish they had been gold. Send me some strings of pearls
    if they are in fashion in that island. Here is the news of the
    village; La Berrueca has married her daughter to a good-for-nothing
    painter, who came here to paint anything that might turn up. The
    council gave him an order to paint his Majesty’s arms over the door
    of the town-hall; he asked two ducats, which they paid him in
    advance; he worked for eight days, and at the end of them had
    nothing painted, and then said he had no turn for painting such
    trifling things; he returned the money, and for all that has
    married on the pretence of being a good workman; to be sure he has
    now laid aside his paint-brush and taken a spade in hand, and goes
    to the field like a gentleman. Pedro Lobo’s son has received the
    first orders and tonsure, with the intention of becoming a priest.
    Minguilla, Mingo Silvato’s granddaughter, found it out, and has
    gone to law with him on the score of having given her promise of
    marriage. Evil tongues say she is with child by him, but he denies
    it stoutly. There are no olives this year, and there is not a drop
    of vinegar to be had in the whole village. A company of soldiers
    passed through here; when they left they took away with them three
    of the girls of the village; I will not tell thee who they are;
    perhaps they will come back, and they will be sure to find those
    who will take them for wives with all their blemishes, good or bad.
    Sanchica is making bonelace; she earns eight maravedis a day clear,
    which she puts into a moneybox as a help towards house furnishing;
    but now that she is a governor’s daughter thou wilt give her a
    portion without her working for it. The fountain in the plaza has
    run dry. A flash of lightning struck the gibbet, and I wish they
    all lit there. I look for an answer to this, and to know thy mind
    about my going to the Court; and so, God keep thee longer than me,
    or as long, for I would not leave thee in this world without me.


Thy wife,
TERESA PANZA.


The letters were applauded, laughed over, relished, and admired; and
then, as if to put the seal to the business, the courier arrived,
bringing the one Sancho sent to Don Quixote, and this, too, was read
out, and it raised some doubts as to the governor’s simplicity. The
duchess withdrew to hear from the page about his adventures in Sancho’s
village, which he narrated at full length without leaving a single
circumstance unmentioned. He gave her the acorns, and also a cheese
which Teresa had given him as being particularly g