less
heaven by some miracle brings home to them the truth that there were
and are, all the pains one takes will be in vain (as experience has
often proved to me), I will not now stop to disabuse you of the error
you share with the multitude. All I shall do is to pray to heaven to
deliver you from it, and show you how beneficial and necessary
knights-errant were in days of yore, and how useful they would be in
these days were they but in vogue; but now, for the sins of the people,
sloth and indolence, gluttony and luxury are triumphant.”

“Our guest has broken out on our hands,” said Don Lorenzo to himself at
this point; “but, for all that, he is a glorious madman, and I should
be a dull blockhead to doubt it.”

Here, being summoned to dinner, they brought their colloquy to a close.
Don Diego asked his son what he had been able to make out as to the
wits of their guest. To which he replied, “All the doctors and clever
scribes in the world will not make sense of the scrawl of his madness;
he is a madman full of streaks, full of lucid intervals.”

They went in to dinner, and the repast was such as Don Diego said on
the road he was in the habit of giving to his guests, neat, plentiful,
and tasty; but what pleased Don Quixote most was the marvellous silence
that reigned throughout the house, for it was like a Carthusian
monastery.

When the cloth had been removed, grace said and their hands washed, Don
Quixote earnestly pressed Don Lorenzo to repeat to him his verses for
the poetical tournament, to which he replied, “Not to be like those
poets who, when they are asked to recite their verses, refuse, and when
they are not asked for them vomit them up, I will repeat my gloss, for
which I do not expect any prize, having composed it merely as an
exercise of ingenuity.”

“A discerning friend of mine,” said Don Quixote, “was of opinion that
no one ought to waste labour in glossing verses; and the reason he gave
was that the gloss can never come up to the text, and that often or
most frequently it wanders away from the meaning and purpose aimed at
in the glossed lines; and besides, that the laws of the gloss were too
strict, as they did not allow interrogations, nor ‘said he,’ nor ‘I
say,’ nor turning verbs into nouns, or altering the construction, not
to speak of other restrictions and limitations that fetter
gloss-writers, as you no doubt know.”

“Verily, Señor Don Quixote,” said Don Lorenzo, “I wish I could catch
your worship tripping at a stretch, but I cannot, for you slip through
my fingers like an eel.”

“I don’t understand what you say, or mean by slipping,” said Don
Quixote.

“I will explain myself another time,” said Don Lorenzo; “for the
present pray attend to the glossed verses and the gloss, which run
thus:

Could ‘was’ become an ‘is’ for me,
Then would I ask no more than this;
Or could, for me, the time that is
Become the time that is to be!—



GLOSS

Dame Fortune once upon a day
To me was bountiful and kind;
But all things change; she changed her mind,
And what she gave she took away.
O Fortune, long I’ve sued to thee;
The gifts thou gavest me restore,
For, trust me, I would ask no more,
Could ‘was’ become an ‘is’ for me.

No other prize I seek to gain,
No triumph, glory, or success,
Only the long-lost happiness,
The memory whereof is pain.
One taste, methinks, of bygone bliss
The heart-consuming fire might stay;
And, so it come without delay,
Then would I ask no more than this.

I ask what cannot be, alas!
That time should ever be, and then
Come back to us, and be again,
No power on earth can bring to pass;
For fleet of foot is he, I wis,
And idly, therefore, do we pray
That what for aye hath left us may
Become for us the time that is.

Perplexed, uncertain, to remain
’Twixt hope and fear, is death, not life;
’Twere better, sure, to end the strife,
And dying, seek release from pain.
And yet, thought were the best for me.
Anon t