me to observe or notice particularly what she
wore; I could only perceive the colours, which were crimson and white,
and the glitter of the gems and jewels on her head dress and apparel,
surpassed by the rare beauty of her lovely auburn hair that vying with
the precious stones and the light of the four torches that stood in the
hall shone with a brighter gleam than all. Oh memory, mortal foe of my
peace! why bring before me now the incomparable beauty of that adored
enemy of mine? Were it not better, cruel memory, to remind me and
recall what she then did, that stirred by a wrong so glaring I may
seek, if not vengeance now, at least to rid myself of life? Be not
weary, sirs, of listening to these digressions; my sorrow is not one of
those that can or should be told tersely and briefly, for to me each
incident seems to call for many words.”

To this the curate replied that not only were they not weary of
listening to him, but that the details he mentioned interested them
greatly, being of a kind by no means to be omitted and deserving of the
same attention as the main story.

“To proceed, then,” continued Cardenio: “all being assembled in the
hall, the priest of the parish came in and as he took the pair by the
hand to perform the requisite ceremony, at the words, ‘Will you, Señora
Luscinda, take Señor Don Fernando, here present, for your lawful
husband, as the holy Mother Church ordains?’ I thrust my head and neck
out from between the tapestries, and with eager ears and throbbing
heart set myself to listen to Luscinda’s answer, awaiting in her reply
the sentence of death or the grant of life. Oh, that I had but dared at
that moment to rush forward crying aloud, ‘Luscinda, Luscinda! have a
care what thou dost; remember what thou owest me; bethink thee thou art
mine and canst not be another’s; reflect that thy utterance of “Yes”
and the end of my life will come at the same instant. O, treacherous
Don Fernando! robber of my glory, death of my life! What seekest thou?
Remember that thou canst not as a Christian attain the object of thy
wishes, for Luscinda is my bride, and I am her husband!’ Fool that I
am! now that I am far away, and out of danger, I say I should have done
what I did not do: now that I have allowed my precious treasure to be
robbed from me, I curse the robber, on whom I might have taken
vengeance had I as much heart for it as I have for bewailing my fate;
in short, as I was then a coward and a fool, little wonder is it if I
am now dying shame-stricken, remorseful, and mad.

“The priest stood waiting for the answer of Luscinda, who for a long
time withheld it; and just as I thought she was taking out the dagger
to save her honour, or struggling for words to make some declaration of
the truth on my behalf, I heard her say in a faint and feeble voice, ‘I
will:’ Don Fernando said the same, and giving her the ring they stood
linked by a knot that could never be loosed. The bridegroom then
approached to embrace his bride; and she, pressing her hand upon her
heart, fell fainting in her mother’s arms. It only remains now for me
to tell you the state I was in when in that consent that I heard I saw
all my hopes mocked, the words and promises of Luscinda proved
falsehoods, and the recovery of the prize I had that instant lost
rendered impossible for ever. I stood stupefied, wholly abandoned, it
seemed, by Heaven, declared the enemy of the earth that bore me, the
air refusing me breath for my sighs, the water moisture for my tears;
it was only the fire that gathered strength so that my whole frame
glowed with rage and jealousy. They were all thrown into confusion by
Luscinda’s fainting, and as her mother was unlacing her to give her air
a sealed paper was discovered in her bosom which Don Fernando seized at
once and began to read by the light of one of the torches. As soon as
he had read it he seated himself in a chair, leaning his cheek on his
hand in the attitud