d even pomegranate pips, with a fork.”

“What!” said Don Antonio, “has Sancho been a governor?”

“Ay,” said Sancho, “and of an island called Barataria. I governed it to
perfection for ten days; and lost my rest all the time; and learned to
look down upon all the governments in the world; I got out of it by
taking to flight, and fell into a pit where I gave myself up for dead,
and out of which I escaped alive by a miracle.”

Don Quixote then gave them a minute account of the whole affair of
Sancho’s government, with which he greatly amused his hearers.

On the cloth being removed Don Antonio, taking Don Quixote by the hand,
passed with him into a distant room in which there was nothing in the
way of furniture except a table, apparently of jasper, resting on a
pedestal of the same, upon which was set up, after the fashion of the
busts of the Roman emperors, a head which seemed to be of bronze. Don
Antonio traversed the whole apartment with Don Quixote and walked round
the table several times, and then said, “Now, Señor Don Quixote, that I
am satisfied that no one is listening to us, and that the door is shut,
I will tell you of one of the rarest adventures, or more properly
speaking strange things, that can be imagined, on condition that you
will keep what I say to you in the remotest recesses of secrecy.”

“I swear it,” said Don Quixote, “and for greater security I will put a
flag-stone over it; for I would have you know, Señor Don Antonio” (he
had by this time learned his name), “that you are addressing one who,
though he has ears to hear, has no tongue to speak; so that you may
safely transfer whatever you have in your bosom into mine, and rely
upon it that you have consigned it to the depths of silence.”

“In reliance upon that promise,” said Don Antonio, “I will astonish you
with what you shall see and hear, and relieve myself of some of the
vexation it gives me to have no one to whom I can confide my secrets,
for they are not of a sort to be entrusted to everybody.”

Don Quixote was puzzled, wondering what could be the object of such
precautions; whereupon Don Antonio taking his hand passed it over the
bronze head and the whole table and the pedestal of jasper on which it
stood, and then said, “This head, Señor Don Quixote, has been made and
fabricated by one of the greatest magicians and wizards the world ever
saw, a Pole, I believe, by birth, and a pupil of the famous Escotillo
of whom such marvellous stories are told. He was here in my house, and
for a consideration of a thousand crowns that I gave him he constructed
this head, which has the property and virtue of answering whatever
questions are put to its ear. He observed the points of the compass, he
traced figures, he studied the stars, he watched favourable moments,
and at length brought it to the perfection we shall see to-morrow, for
on Fridays it is mute, and this being Friday we must wait till the next
day. In the interval your worship may consider what you would like to
ask it; and I know by experience that in all its answers it tells the
truth.”

Don Quixote was amazed at the virtue and property of the head, and was
inclined to disbelieve Don Antonio; but seeing what a short time he had
to wait to test the matter, he did not choose to say anything except
that he thanked him for having revealed to him so mighty a secret. They
then quitted the room, Don Antonio locked the door, and they repaired
to the chamber where the rest of the gentlemen were assembled. In the
meantime Sancho had recounted to them several of the adventures and
accidents that had happened his master.

That afternoon they took Don Quixote out for a stroll, not in his
armour but in street costume, with a surcoat of tawny cloth upon him,
that at that season would have made ice itself sweat. Orders were left
with the servants to entertain Sancho so as not to let him leave the
house. Don Quixote was mounted, not on Rocinante, but 