ancha to whom I like; and you yourself will
find yourself called ‘Doña Teresa Panza,’ and sitting in church on a
fine carpet and cushions and draperies, in spite and in defiance of all
the born ladies of the town? No, stay as you are, growing neither
greater nor less, like a tapestry figure—Let us say no more about it,
for Sanchica shall be a countess, say what you will.”

“Are you sure of all you say, husband?” replied Teresa. “Well, for all
that, I am afraid this rank of countess for my daughter will be her
ruin. You do as you like, make a duchess or a princess of her, but I
can tell you it will not be with my will and consent. I was always a
lover of equality, brother, and I can’t bear to see people give
themselves airs without any right. They called me Teresa at my baptism,
a plain, simple name, without any additions or tags or fringes of Dons
or Doñas; Cascajo was my father’s name, and as I am your wife, I am
called Teresa Panza, though by right I ought to be called Teresa
Cascajo; but ‘kings go where laws like,’ and I am content with this
name without having the ‘Don’ put on top of it to make it so heavy that
I cannot carry it; and I don’t want to make people talk about me when
they see me go dressed like a countess or governor’s wife; for they
will say at once, ‘See what airs the slut gives herself! Only yesterday
she was always spinning flax, and used to go to mass with the tail of
her petticoat over her head instead of a mantle, and there she goes
to-day in a hooped gown with her broaches and airs, as if we didn’t
know her!’ If God keeps me in my seven senses, or five, or whatever
number I have, I am not going to bring myself to such a pass; go you,
brother, and be a government or an island man, and swagger as much as
you like; for by the soul of my mother, neither my daughter nor I are
going to stir a step from our village; a respectable woman should have
a broken leg and keep at home; and to be busy at something is a
virtuous damsel’s holiday; be off to your adventures along with your
Don Quixote, and leave us to our misadventures, for God will mend them
for us according as we deserve it. I don’t know, I’m sure, who fixed
the ‘Don’ to him, what neither his father nor grandfather ever had.”

“I declare thou hast a devil of some sort in thy body!” said Sancho.
“God help thee, what a lot of things thou hast strung together, one
after the other, without head or tail! What have Cascajo, and the
broaches and the proverbs and the airs, to do with what I say? Look
here, fool and dolt (for so I may call you, when you don’t understand
my words, and run away from good fortune), if I had said that my
daughter was to throw herself down from a tower, or go roaming the
world, as the Infanta Doña Urraca wanted to do, you would be right in
not giving way to my will; but if in an instant, in less than the
twinkling of an eye, I put the ‘Don’ and ‘my lady’ on her back, and
take her out of the stubble, and place her under a canopy, on a dais,
and on a couch, with more velvet cushions than all the Almohades of
Morocco ever had in their family, why won’t you consent and fall in
with my wishes?”

“Do you know why, husband?” replied Teresa; “because of the proverb
that says ‘who covers thee, discovers thee.’ At the poor man people
only throw a hasty glance; on the rich man they fix their eyes; and if
the said rich man was once on a time poor, it is then there is the
sneering and the tattle and spite of backbiters; and in the streets
here they swarm as thick as bees.”

“Look here, Teresa,” said Sancho, “and listen to what I am now going to
say to you; maybe you never heard it in all your life; and I do not
give my own notions, for what I am about to say are the opinions of his
reverence the preacher, who preached in this town last Lent, and who
said, if I remember rightly, that all things present that our eyes
behold, bring themselves before us, and remain and fix themselves on
