e upon it as a good Christian; and know that the Christians
keep their promises better than the Moors. Allah and Marien his mother
watch over thee, my Lady.”

The paper being written and folded I waited two days until the baño was
empty as before, and immediately repaired to the usual walk on the
terrace to see if there were any sign of the reed, which was not long
in making its appearance. As soon as I saw it, although I could not
distinguish who put it out, I showed the paper as a sign to attach the
thread, but it was already fixed to the reed, and to it I tied the
paper; and shortly afterwards our star once more made its appearance
with the white flag of peace, the little bundle. It was dropped, and I
picked it up, and found in the cloth, in gold and silver coins of all
sorts, more than fifty crowns, which fifty times more strengthened our
joy and doubled our hope of gaining our liberty. That very night our
renegade returned and said he had learned that the Moor we had been
told of lived in that house, that his name was Hadji Morato, that he
was enormously rich, that he had one only daughter the heiress of all
his wealth, and that it was the general opinion throughout the city
that she was the most beautiful woman in Barbary, and that several of
the viceroys who came there had sought her for a wife, but that she had
been always unwilling to marry; and he had learned, moreover, that she
had a Christian slave who was now dead; all which agreed with the
contents of the paper. We immediately took counsel with the renegade as
to what means would have to be adopted in order to carry off the
Moorish lady and bring us all to Christian territory; and in the end it
was agreed that for the present we should wait for a second
communication from Zoraida (for that was the name of her who now
desires to be called Maria), because we saw clearly that she and no one
else could find a way out of all these difficulties. When we had
decided upon this the renegade told us not to be uneasy, for he would
lose his life or restore us to liberty. For four days the baño was
filled with people, for which reason the reed delayed its appearance
for four days, but at the end of that time, when the baño was, as it
generally was, empty, it appeared with the cloth so bulky that it
promised a happy birth. Reed and cloth came down to me, and I found
another paper and a hundred crowns in gold, without any other coin. The
renegade was present, and in our cell we gave him the paper to read,
which was to this effect:

“I cannot think of a plan, señor, for our going to Spain, nor has Lela
Marien shown me one, though I have asked her. All that can be done is
for me to give you plenty of money in gold from this window. With it
ransom yourself and your friends, and let one of you go to the land of
the Christians, and there buy a vessel and come back for the others;
and he will find me in my father’s garden, which is at the Babazon gate
near the seashore, where I shall be all this summer with my father and
my servants. You can carry me away from there by night without any
danger, and bring me to the vessel. And remember thou art to be my
husband, else I will pray to Marien to punish thee. If thou canst not
trust anyone to go for the vessel, ransom thyself and do thou go, for I
know thou wilt return more surely than any other, as thou art a
gentleman and a Christian. Endeavour to make thyself acquainted with
the garden; and when I see thee walking yonder I shall know that the
baño is empty and I will give thee abundance of money. Allah protect
thee, señor.”

These were the words and contents of the second paper, and on hearing
them, each declared himself willing to be the ransomed one, and
promised to go and return with scrupulous good faith; and I too made
the same offer; but to all this the renegade objected, saying that he
would not on any account consent to one being set free before all went
together, as 