 side; for though the figures are
visible, they are full of threads that make them indistinct, and they
do not show with the smoothness and brightness of the right side; and
translation from easy languages argues neither ingenuity nor command of
words, any more than transcribing or copying out one document from
another. But I do not mean by this to draw the inference that no credit
is to be allowed for the work of translating, for a man may employ
himself in ways worse and less profitable to himself. This estimate
does not include two famous translators, Doctor Cristóbal de Figueroa,
in his _Pastor Fido_, and Don Juan de Jáuregui, in his _Aminta_,
wherein by their felicity they leave it in doubt which is the
translation and which the original. But tell me, are you printing this
book at your own risk, or have you sold the copyright to some
bookseller?”

“I print at my own risk,” said the author, “and I expect to make a
thousand ducats at least by this first edition, which is to be of two
thousand copies that will go off in a twinkling at six reals apiece.”

“A fine calculation you are making!” said Don Quixote; “it is plain you
don’t know the ins and outs of the printers, and how they play into one
another’s hands. I promise you when you find yourself saddled with two
thousand copies you will feel so sore that it will astonish you,
particularly if the book is a little out of the common and not in any
way highly spiced.”

“What!” said the author, “would your worship, then, have me give it to
a bookseller who will give three maravedis for the copyright and think
he is doing me a favour? I do not print my books to win fame in the
world, for I am known in it already by my works; I want to make money,
without which reputation is not worth a rap.”

“God send your worship good luck,” said Don Quixote; and he moved on to
another case, where he saw them correcting a sheet of a book with the
title of “Light of the Soul;” noticing it he observed, “Books like
this, though there are many of the kind, are the ones that deserve to
be printed, for many are the sinners in these days, and lights
unnumbered are needed for all that are in darkness.”

He passed on, and saw they were also correcting another book, and when
he asked its title they told him it was called, “The Second Part of the
Ingenious Gentleman Don Quixote of La Mancha,” by one of Tordesillas.

“I have heard of this book already,” said Don Quixote, “and verily and
on my conscience I thought it had been by this time burned to ashes as
a meddlesome intruder; but its Martinmas will come to it as it does to
every pig; for fictions have the more merit and charm about them the
more nearly they approach the truth or what looks like it; and true
stories, the truer they are the better they are;” and so saying he
walked out of the printing office with a certain amount of displeasure
in his looks. That same day Don Antonio arranged to take him to see the
galleys that lay at the beach, whereat Sancho was in high delight, as
he had never seen any all his life. Don Antonio sent word to the
commandant of the galleys that he intended to bring his guest, the
famous Don Quixote of La Mancha, of whom the commandant and all the
citizens had already heard, that afternoon to see them; and what
happened on board of them will be told in the next chapter.



p62e.jpg (18K)



CHAPTER LXIII.
OF THE MISHAP THAT BEFELL SANCHO PANZA THROUGH THE VISIT TO THE
GALLEYS, AND THE STRANGE ADVENTURE OF THE FAIR MORISCO




p63a.jpg (151K)

Full Size



Profound were Don Quixote’s reflections on the reply of the enchanted
head, not one of them, however, hitting on the secret of the trick, but
all concentrated on the promise, which he regarded as a certainty, of
Dulcinea’s disenchantment. This he turned over in his mind again and
again with great satisfaction, fully persuaded that he would shortly
see its fulfillment; and as for Sancho, th