 entreat your worship to let me sleep, for sleep is
relief from misery to those who are miserable when awake.”

“Be it so, and God be with thee,” said Don Quixote.

They fell asleep, both of them, and Cide Hamete, the author of this
great history, took this opportunity to record and relate what it was
that induced the duke and duchess to get up the elaborate plot that has
been described. The bachelor Samson Carrasco, he says, not forgetting
how he as the Knight of the Mirrors had been vanquished and overthrown
by Don Quixote, which defeat and overthrow upset all his plans,
resolved to try his hand again, hoping for better luck than he had
before; and so, having learned where Don Quixote was from the page who
brought the letter and present to Sancho’s wife, Teresa Panza, he got
himself new armour and another horse, and put a white moon upon his
shield, and to carry his arms he had a mule led by a peasant, not by
Tom Cecial his former squire for fear he should be recognised by Sancho
or Don Quixote. He came to the duke’s castle, and the duke informed him
of the road and route Don Quixote had taken with the intention of being
present at the jousts at Saragossa. He told him, too, of the jokes he
had practised upon him, and of the device for the disenchantment of
Dulcinea at the expense of Sancho’s backside; and finally he gave him
an account of the trick Sancho had played upon his master, making him
believe that Dulcinea was enchanted and turned into a country wench;
and of how the duchess, his wife, had persuaded Sancho that it was he
himself who was deceived, inasmuch as Dulcinea was really enchanted; at
which the bachelor laughed not a little, and marvelled as well at the
sharpness and simplicity of Sancho as at the length to which Don
Quixote’s madness went. The duke begged of him if he found him (whether
he overcame him or not) to return that way and let him know the result.
This the bachelor did; he set out in quest of Don Quixote, and not
finding him at Saragossa, he went on, and how he fared has been already
told. He returned to the duke’s castle and told him all, what the
conditions of the combat were, and how Don Quixote was now, like a
loyal knight-errant, returning to keep his promise of retiring to his
village for a year, by which time, said the bachelor, he might perhaps
be cured of his madness; for that was the object that had led him to
adopt these disguises, as it was a sad thing for a gentleman of such
good parts as Don Quixote to be a madman. And so he took his leave of
the duke, and went home to his village to wait there for Don Quixote,
who was coming after him. Thereupon the duke seized the opportunity of
practising this mystification upon him; so much did he enjoy everything
connected with Sancho and Don Quixote. He had the roads about the
castle far and near, everywhere he thought Don Quixote was likely to
pass on his return, occupied by large numbers of his servants on foot
and on horseback, who were to bring him to the castle, by fair means or
foul, if they met him. They did meet him, and sent word to the duke,
who, having already settled what was to be done, as soon as he heard of
his arrival, ordered the torches and lamps in the court to be lit and
Altisidora to be placed on the catafalque with all the pomp and
ceremony that has been described, the whole affair being so well
arranged and acted that it differed but little from reality. And Cide
Hamete says, moreover, that for his part he considers the concocters of
the joke as crazy as the victims of it, and that the duke and duchess
were not two fingers’ breadth removed from being something like fools
themselves when they took such pains to make game of a pair of fools.

As for the latter, one was sleeping soundly and the other lying awake
occupied with his desultory thoughts, when daylight came to them
bringing with it the desire to rise; for the lazy down was never a
delight to Don Quixote, v