ttomless
pit.”

“You are right, friend,” said the cousin; and said Don Quixote,
“Sancho, that question and answer are not thine own; thou hast heard
them from someone else.”

“Hold your peace, señor,” said Sancho; “faith, if I take to asking
questions and answering, I’ll go on from this till to-morrow morning.
Nay! to ask foolish things and answer nonsense I needn’t go looking for
help from my neighbours.”

“Thou hast said more than thou art aware of, Sancho,” said Don Quixote;
“for there are some who weary themselves out in learning and proving
things that, after they are known and proved, are not worth a farthing
to the understanding or memory.”

In this and other pleasant conversation the day went by, and that night
they put up at a small hamlet whence it was not more than two leagues
to the cave of Montesinos, so the cousin told Don Quixote, adding, that
if he was bent upon entering it, it would be requisite for him to
provide himself with ropes, so that he might be tied and lowered into
its depths. Don Quixote said that even if it reached to the bottomless
pit he meant to see where it went to; so they bought about a hundred
fathoms of rope, and next day at two in the afternoon they arrived at
the cave, the mouth of which is spacious and wide, but full of thorn
and wild-fig bushes and brambles and briars, so thick and matted that
they completely close it up and cover it over.

On coming within sight of it the cousin, Sancho, and Don Quixote
dismounted, and the first two immediately tied the latter very firmly
with the ropes, and as they were girding and swathing him Sancho said
to him, “Mind what you are about, master mine; don’t go burying
yourself alive, or putting yourself where you’ll be like a bottle put
to cool in a well; it’s no affair or business of your worship’s to
become the explorer of this, which must be worse than a Moorish
dungeon.”

“Tie me and hold thy peace,” said Don Quixote, “for an emprise like
this, friend Sancho, was reserved for me;” and said the guide, “I beg
of you, Señor Don Quixote, to observe carefully and examine with a
hundred eyes everything that is within there; perhaps there may be some
things for me to put into my book of ‘Transformations.’”

“The drum is in hands that will know how to beat it well enough,” said
Sancho Panza.

When he had said this and finished the tying (which was not over the
armour but only over the doublet) Don Quixote observed, “It was
careless of us not to have provided ourselves with a small cattle-bell
to be tied on the rope close to me, the sound of which would show that
I was still descending and alive; but as that is out of the question
now, in God’s hand be it to guide me;” and forthwith he fell on his
knees and in a low voice offered up a prayer to heaven, imploring God
to aid him and grant him success in this to all appearance perilous and
untried adventure, and then exclaimed aloud, “O mistress of my actions
and movements, illustrious and peerless Dulcinea del Toboso, if so be
the prayers and supplications of this fortunate lover can reach thy
ears, by thy incomparable beauty I entreat thee to listen to them, for
they but ask thee not to refuse me thy favour and protection now that I
stand in such need of them. I am about to precipitate, to sink, to
plunge myself into the abyss that is here before me, only to let the
world know that while thou dost favour me there is no impossibility I
will not attempt and accomplish.” With these words he approached the
cavern, and perceived that it was impossible to let himself down or
effect an entrance except by sheer force or cleaving a passage; so
drawing his sword he began to demolish and cut away the brambles at the
mouth of the cave, at the noise of which a vast multitude of crows and
choughs flew out of it so thick and so fast that they knocked Don
Quixote down; and if he had been as much of a believer in augury as he
was a Catholic Christian he 