 go beyond
seeing the streets of this town.”

The appearance of the tipstaffs with her brother in custody, whom one
of them had overtaken as he ran away from his sister, now fully
confirmed the truth of what the damsel said. He had nothing on but a
rich petticoat and a short blue damask cloak with fine gold lace, and
his head was uncovered and adorned only with its own hair, which looked
like rings of gold, so bright and curly was it. The governor, the
majordomo, and the carver went aside with him, and, unheard by his
sister, asked him how he came to be in that dress, and he with no less
shame and embarrassment told exactly the same story as his sister, to
the great delight of the enamoured carver; the governor, however, said
to them, “In truth, young lady and gentleman, this has been a very
childish affair, and to explain your folly and rashness there was no
necessity for all this delay and all these tears and sighs; for if you
had said we are so-and-so, and we escaped from our father’s house in
this way in order to ramble about, out of mere curiosity and with no
other object, there would have been an end of the matter, and none of
these little sobs and tears and all the rest of it.”

“That is true,” said the damsel, “but you see the confusion I was in
was so great it did not let me behave as I ought.”

“No harm has been done,” said Sancho; “come, we will leave you at your
father’s house; perhaps they will not have missed you; and another time
don’t be so childish or eager to see the world; for a respectable
damsel should have a broken leg and keep at home; and the woman and the
hen by gadding about are soon lost; and she who is eager to see is also
eager to be seen; I say no more.”

The youth thanked the governor for his kind offer to take them home,
and they directed their steps towards the house, which was not far off.
On reaching it the youth threw a pebble up at a grating, and
immediately a woman-servant who was waiting for them came down and
opened the door to them, and they went in, leaving the party marvelling
as much at their grace and beauty as at the fancy they had for seeing
the world by night and without quitting the village; which, however,
they set down to their youth.

The head-carver was left with a heart pierced through and through, and
he made up his mind on the spot to demand the damsel in marriage of her
father on the morrow, making sure she would not be refused him as he
was a servant of the duke’s; and even to Sancho ideas and schemes of
marrying the youth to his daughter Sanchica suggested themselves, and
he resolved to open the negotiation at the proper season, persuading
himself that no husband could be refused to a governor’s daughter. And
so the night’s round came to an end, and a couple of days later the
government, whereby all his plans were overthrown and swept away, as
will be seen farther on.



p49e.jpg (55K)



CHAPTER L.
WHEREIN IS SET FORTH WHO THE ENCHANTERS AND EXECUTIONERS WERE WHO
FLOGGED THE DUENNA AND PINCHED DON QUIXOTE, AND ALSO WHAT BEFELL THE
PAGE WHO CARRIED THE LETTER TO TERESA PANZA, SANCHO PANZA’S WIFE




p50a.jpg (104K)

Full Size



Cide Hamete, the painstaking investigator of the minute points of this
veracious history, says that when Doña Rodriguez left her own room to
go to Don Quixote’s, another duenna who slept with her observed her,
and as all duennas are fond of prying, listening, and sniffing, she
followed her so silently that the good Rodriguez never perceived it;
and as soon as the duenna saw her enter Don Quixote’s room, not to fail
in a duenna’s invariable practice of tattling, she hurried off that
instant to report to the duchess how Doña Rodriguez was closeted with
Don Quixote. The duchess told the duke, and asked him to let her and
Altisidora go and see what the said duenna wanted with Don Quixote. The
duke gave them leave, and the pair cautiously and quietly crept to the
door 