the gates of the town, which was a walled one,
the municipality came forth to meet him, the bells rang out a peal, and
the inhabitants showed every sign of general satisfaction; and with
great pomp they conducted him to the principal church to give thanks to
God, and then with burlesque ceremonies they presented him with the
keys of the town, and acknowledged him as perpetual governor of the
island of Barataria. The costume, the beard, and the fat squat figure
of the new governor astonished all those who were not in on the secret,
and even all who were, and they were not a few. Finally, leading him
out of the church they carried him to the judgment seat and seated him
on it, and the duke’s majordomo said to him, “It is an ancient custom
in this island, señor governor, that he who comes to take possession of
this famous island is bound to answer a question which shall be put to
him, and which must be a somewhat knotty and difficult one; and by his
answer the people take the measure of their new governor’s wit, and
hail with joy or deplore his arrival accordingly.”

While the majordomo was making this speech Sancho was gazing at several
large letters inscribed on the wall opposite his seat, and as he could
not read he asked what that was that was painted on the wall. The
answer was, “Señor, there is written and recorded the day on which your
lordship took possession of this island, and the inscription says,
‘This day, the so-and-so of such-and-such a month and year, Señor Don
Sancho Panza took possession of this island; many years may he enjoy
it.’”

“And whom do they call Don Sancho Panza?” asked Sancho.

“Your lordship,” replied the majordomo; “for no other Panza but the one
who is now seated in that chair has ever entered this island.”

“Well then, let me tell you, brother,” said Sancho, “I haven’t got the
‘Don,’ nor has anyone of my family ever had it; my name is plain Sancho
Panza, and Sancho was my father’s name, and Sancho was my grandfather’s
and they were all Panzas, without any Dons or Doñas tacked on; I
suspect that in this island there are more Dons than stones; but never
mind; God knows what I mean, and maybe if my government lasts four days
I’ll weed out these Dons that no doubt are as great a nuisance as the
midges, they’re so plenty. Let the majordomo go on with his question,
and I’ll give the best answer I can, whether the people deplore or
not.”

At this instant there came into court two old men, one carrying a cane
by way of a walking-stick, and the one who had no stick said, “Señor,
some time ago I lent this good man ten gold-crowns in gold to gratify
him and do him a service, on the condition that he was to return them
to me whenever I should ask for them. A long time passed before I asked
for them, for I would not put him to any greater straits to return them
than he was in when I lent them to him; but thinking he was growing
careless about payment I asked for them once and several times; and not
only will he not give them back, but he denies that he owes them, and
says I never lent him any such crowns; or if I did, that he repaid
them; and I have no witnesses either of the loan, or the payment, for
he never paid me; I want your worship to put him to his oath, and if he
swears he returned them to me I forgive him the debt here and before
God.”



p45b.jpg (400K)

Full Size



“What say you to this, good old man, you with the stick?” said Sancho.

To which the old man replied, “I admit, señor, that he lent them to me;
but let your worship lower your staff, and as he leaves it to my oath,
I’ll swear that I gave them back, and paid him really and truly.”

The governor lowered the staff, and as he did so the old man who had
the stick handed it to the other old man to hold for him while he
swore, as if he found it in his way; and then laid his hand on the
cross of the staff, saying that it was true the ten crowns that were
demanded of him