 him at the
duke’s castle the night Altisidora came back to life. He had also fixed
the mitre on Dapple’s head, the oddest transformation and decoration
that ever ass in the world underwent. They were at once recognised by
both the curate and the bachelor, who came towards them with open arms.
Don Quixote dismounted and received them with a close embrace; and the
boys, who are lynxes that nothing escapes, spied out the ass’s mitre
and came running to see it, calling out to one another, “Come here,
boys, and see Sancho Panza’s ass figged out finer than Mingo, and Don
Quixote’s beast leaner than ever.”

So at length, with the boys capering round them, and accompanied by the
curate and the bachelor, they made their entrance into the town, and
proceeded to Don Quixote’s house, at the door of which they found his
housekeeper and niece, whom the news of his arrival had already
reached. It had been brought to Teresa Panza, Sancho’s wife, as well,
and she with her hair all loose and half naked, dragging Sanchica her
daughter by the hand, ran out to meet her husband; but seeing him
coming in by no means as good case as she thought a governor ought to
be, she said to him, “How is it you come this way, husband? It seems to
me you come tramping and footsore, and looking more like a disorderly
vagabond than a governor.”

“Hold your tongue, Teresa,” said Sancho; “often ‘where there are pegs
there are no flitches;’ let’s go into the house and there you’ll hear
strange things. I bring money, and that’s the main thing, got by my own
industry without wronging anybody.”

“You bring the money, my good husband,” said Teresa, “and no matter
whether it was got this way or that; for, however you may have got it,
you’ll not have brought any new practice into the world.”

Sanchica embraced her father and asked him if he brought her anything,
for she had been looking out for him as for the showers of May; and she
taking hold of him by the girdle on one side, and his wife by the hand,
while the daughter led Dapple, they made for their house, leaving Don
Quixote in his, in the hands of his niece and housekeeper, and in the
company of the curate and the bachelor.

Don Quixote at once, without any regard to time or season, withdrew in
private with the bachelor and the curate, and in a few words told them
of his defeat, and of the engagement he was under not to quit his
village for a year, which he meant to keep to the letter without
departing a hair’s breadth from it, as became a knight-errant bound by
scrupulous good faith and the laws of knight-errantry; and of how he
thought of turning shepherd for that year, and taking his diversion in
the solitude of the fields, where he could with perfect freedom give
range to his thoughts of love while he followed the virtuous pastoral
calling; and he besought them, if they had not a great deal to do and
were not prevented by more important business, to consent to be his
companions, for he would buy sheep enough to qualify them for
shepherds; and the most important point of the whole affair, he could
tell them, was settled, for he had given them names that would fit them
to a T. The curate asked what they were. Don Quixote replied that he
himself was to be called the shepherd Quixotize and the bachelor the
shepherd Carrascon, and the curate the shepherd Curambro, and Sancho
Panza the shepherd Pancino.

Both were astounded at Don Quixote’s new craze; however, lest he should
once more make off out of the village from them in pursuit of his
chivalry, they trusting that in the course of the year he might be
cured, fell in with his new project, applauded his crazy idea as a
bright one, and offered to share the life with him. “And what’s more,”
said Samson Carrasco, “I am, as all the world knows, a very famous
poet, and I’ll be always making verses, pastoral, or courtly, or as it
may come into my head, to pass away our time in those secluded regions
where we