ith a surgeon. The truth
of the story is that that Master Elisabad whom the madman mentioned was
a man of great prudence and sound judgment, and served as governor and
physician to the queen, but to suppose that she was his mistress is
nonsense deserving very severe punishment; and as a proof that Cardenio
did not know what he was saying, remember when he said it he was out of
his wits.”

“That is what I say,” said Sancho; “there was no occasion for minding
the words of a madman; for if good luck had not helped your worship,
and he had sent that stone at your head instead of at your breast, a
fine way we should have been in for standing up for my lady yonder, God
confound her! And then, would not Cardenio have gone free as a madman?”

“Against men in their senses or against madmen,” said Don Quixote,
“every knight-errant is bound to stand up for the honour of women,
whoever they may be, much more for queens of such high degree and
dignity as Queen Madasima, for whom I have a particular regard on
account of her amiable qualities; for, besides being extremely
beautiful, she was very wise, and very patient under her misfortunes,
of which she had many; and the counsel and society of the Master
Elisabad were a great help and support to her in enduring her
afflictions with wisdom and resignation; hence the ignorant and
ill-disposed vulgar took occasion to say and think that she was his
mistress; and they lie, I say it once more, and will lie two hundred
times more, all who think and say so.”

“I neither say nor think so,” said Sancho; “let them look to it; with
their bread let them eat it; they have rendered account to God whether
they misbehaved or not; I come from my vineyard, I know nothing; I am
not fond of prying into other men’s lives; he who buys and lies feels
it in his purse; moreover, naked was I born, naked I find myself, I
neither lose nor gain; but if they did, what is that to me? many think
there are flitches where there are no hooks; but who can put gates to
the open plain? moreover they said of God—”

“God bless me,” said Don Quixote, “what a set of absurdities thou art
stringing together! What has what we are talking about got to do with
the proverbs thou art threading one after the other? for God’s sake
hold thy tongue, Sancho, and henceforward keep to prodding thy ass and
don’t meddle in what does not concern thee; and understand with all thy
five senses that everything I have done, am doing, or shall do, is well
founded on reason and in conformity with the rules of chivalry, for I
understand them better than all the world that profess them.”

“Señor,” replied Sancho, “is it a good rule of chivalry that we should
go astray through these mountains without path or road, looking for a
madman who when he is found will perhaps take a fancy to finish what he
began, not his story, but your worship’s head and my ribs, and end by
breaking them altogether for us?”



c25b.jpg (330K)

Full Size




“Peace, I say again, Sancho,” said Don Quixote, “for let me tell thee
it is not so much the desire of finding that madman that leads me into
these regions as that which I have of performing among them an
achievement wherewith I shall win eternal name and fame throughout the
known world; and it shall be such that I shall thereby set the seal on
all that can make a knight-errant perfect and famous.”

“And is it very perilous, this achievement?”

“No,” replied he of the Rueful Countenance; “though it may be in the
dice that we may throw deuce-ace instead of sixes; but all will depend
on thy diligence.”

“On my diligence!” said Sancho.

“Yes,” said Don Quixote, “for if thou dost return soon from the place
where I mean to send thee, my penance will be soon over, and my glory
will soon begin. But as it is not right to keep thee any longer in
suspense, waiting to see what comes of my words, I would have thee
know, Sancho, that the famous Amadis of Gaul was one