ard from the goatherd, and more eager than ever to
discover who the unhappy madman was; and in his heart he resolved, as
he had done before, to search for him all over the mountain, not
leaving a corner or cave unexamined until he had found him. But chance
arranged matters better than he expected or hoped, for at that very
moment, in a gorge on the mountain that opened where they stood, the
youth he wished to find made his appearance, coming along talking to
himself in a way that would have been unintelligible near at hand, much
more at a distance. His garb was what has been described, save that as
he drew near, Don Quixote perceived that a tattered doublet which he
wore was amber-tanned, from which he concluded that one who wore such
garments could not be of very low rank.

Approaching them, the youth greeted them in a harsh and hoarse voice
but with great courtesy. Don Quixote returned his salutation with equal
politeness, and dismounting from Rocinante advanced with well-bred
bearing and grace to embrace him, and held him for some time close in
his arms as if he had known him for a long time. The other, whom we may
call the Ragged One of the Sorry Countenance, as Don Quixote was of the
Rueful, after submitting to the embrace pushed him back a little and,
placing his hands on Don Quixote’s shoulders, stood gazing at him as if
seeking to see whether he knew him, not less amazed, perhaps, at the
sight of the face, figure, and armour of Don Quixote than Don Quixote
was at the sight of him. To be brief, the first to speak after
embracing was the Ragged One, and he said what will be told farther on.



c23i.jpg (53K)

Full Size



CHAPTER XXIV.
IN WHICH IS CONTINUED THE ADVENTURE OF THE SIERRA MORENA




c24a.jpg (151K)

Full Size




The history relates that it was with the greatest attention Don Quixote
listened to the ragged knight of the Sierra, who began by saying:

“Of a surety, señor, whoever you are, for I know you not, I thank you
for the proofs of kindness and courtesy you have shown me, and would I
were in a condition to requite with something more than good-will that
which you have displayed towards me in the cordial reception you have
given me; but my fate does not afford me any other means of returning
kindnesses done me save the hearty desire to repay them.”

“Mine,” replied Don Quixote, “is to be of service to you, so much so
that I had resolved not to quit these mountains until I had found you,
and learned of you whether there is any kind of relief to be found for
that sorrow under which from the strangeness of your life you seem to
labour; and to search for you with all possible diligence, if search
had been necessary. And if your misfortune should prove to be one of
those that refuse admission to any sort of consolation, it was my
purpose to join you in lamenting and mourning over it, so far as I
could; for it is still some comfort in misfortune to find one who can
feel for it. And if my good intentions deserve to be acknowledged with
any kind of courtesy, I entreat you, señor, by that which I perceive
you possess in so high a degree, and likewise conjure you by whatever
you love or have loved best in life, to tell me who you are and the
cause that has brought you to live or die in these solitudes like a
brute beast, dwelling among them in a manner so foreign to your
condition as your garb and appearance show. And I swear,” added Don
Quixote, “by the order of knighthood which I have received, and by my
vocation of knight-errant, if you gratify me in this, to serve you with
all the zeal my calling demands of me, either in relieving your
misfortune if it admits of relief, or in joining you in lamenting it as
I promised to do.”

The Knight of the Thicket, hearing him of the Rueful Countenance talk
in this strain, did nothing but stare at him, and stare at him again,
and again survey him from head to foot; and when he had thoroughly
e