what had led them
to make so extraordinary a change. About this time the father of our
Chrysostom died, and he was left heir to a large amount of property in
chattels as well as in land, no small number of cattle and sheep, and a
large sum of money, of all of which the young man was left dissolute
owner, and indeed he was deserving of it all, for he was a very good
comrade, and kind-hearted, and a friend of worthy folk, and had a
countenance like a benediction. Presently it came to be known that he
had changed his dress with no other object than to wander about these
wastes after that shepherdess Marcela our lad mentioned a while ago,
with whom the deceased Chrysostom had fallen in love. And I must tell
you now, for it is well you should know it, who this girl is; perhaps,
and even without any perhaps, you will not have heard anything like it
all the days of your life, though you should live more years than
sarna.”

“Say Sarra,” said Don Quixote, unable to endure the goatherd’s
confusion of words.

“The sarna lives long enough,” answered Pedro; “and if, señor, you must
go finding fault with words at every step, we shall not make an end of
it this twelvemonth.”

“Pardon me, friend,” said Don Quixote; “but, as there is such a
difference between sarna and Sarra, I told you of it; however, you have
answered very rightly, for sarna lives longer than Sarra: so continue
your story, and I will not object any more to anything.”

“I say then, my dear sir,” said the goatherd, “that in our village
there was a farmer even richer than the father of Chrysostom, who was
named Guillermo, and upon whom God bestowed, over and above great
wealth, a daughter at whose birth her mother died, the most respected
woman there was in this neighbourhood; I fancy I can see her now with
that countenance which had the sun on one side and the moon on the
other; and moreover active, and kind to the poor, for which I trust
that at the present moment her soul is in bliss with God in the other
world. Her husband Guillermo died of grief at the death of so good a
wife, leaving his daughter Marcela, a child and rich, to the care of an
uncle of hers, a priest and prebendary in our village. The girl grew up
with such beauty that it reminded us of her mother’s, which was very
great, and yet it was thought that the daughter’s would exceed it; and
so when she reached the age of fourteen to fifteen years nobody beheld
her but blessed God that had made her so beautiful, and the greater
number were in love with her past redemption. Her uncle kept her in
great seclusion and retirement, but for all that the fame of her great
beauty spread so that, as well for it as for her great wealth, her
uncle was asked, solicited, and importuned, to give her in marriage not
only by those of our town but of those many leagues round, and by the
persons of highest quality in them. But he, being a good Christian man,
though he desired to give her in marriage at once, seeing her to be old
enough, was unwilling to do so without her consent, not that he had any
eye to the gain and profit which the custody of the girl’s property
brought him while he put off her marriage; and, faith, this was said in
praise of the good priest in more than one set in the town. For I would
have you know, Sir Errant, that in these little villages everything is
talked about and everything is carped at, and rest assured, as I am,
that the priest must be over and above good who forces his parishioners
to speak well of him, especially in villages.”

“That is the truth,” said Don Quixote; “but go on, for the story is
very good, and you, good Pedro, tell it with very good grace.”

“May that of the Lord not be wanting to me,” said Pedro; “that is the
one to have. To proceed; you must know that though the uncle put before
his niece and described to her the qualities of each one in particular
of the many who had asked her in marriage, begging her to marry and
m