e of them.

“Well, then, you must know,” continued the young man, “this morning
that famous student-shepherd called Chrysostom died, and it is rumoured
that he died of love for that devil of a village girl the daughter of
Guillermo the Rich, she that wanders about the wolds here in the dress
of a shepherdess.”

“You mean Marcela?” said one.

“Her I mean,” answered the goatherd; “and the best of it is, he has
directed in his will that he is to be buried in the fields like a Moor,
and at the foot of the rock where the Cork-tree spring is, because, as
the story goes (and they say he himself said so), that was the place
where he first saw her. And he has also left other directions which the
clergy of the village say should not and must not be obeyed because
they savour of paganism. To all which his great friend Ambrosio the
student, he who, like him, also went dressed as a shepherd, replies
that everything must be done without any omission according to the
directions left by Chrysostom, and about this the village is all in
commotion; however, report says that, after all, what Ambrosio and all
the shepherds his friends desire will be done, and to-morrow they are
coming to bury him with great ceremony where I said. I am sure it will
be something worth seeing; at least I will not fail to go and see it
even if I knew I should not return to the village to-morrow.”

“We will do the same,” answered the goatherds, “and cast lots to see
who must stay to mind the goats of all.”

“Thou sayest well, Pedro,” said one, “though there will be no need of
taking that trouble, for I will stay behind for all; and don’t suppose
it is virtue or want of curiosity in me; it is that the splinter that
ran into my foot the other day will not let me walk.”

“For all that, we thank thee,” answered Pedro.

Don Quixote asked Pedro to tell him who the dead man was and who the
shepherdess, to which Pedro replied that all he knew was that the dead
man was a wealthy gentleman belonging to a village in those mountains,
who had been a student at Salamanca for many years, at the end of which
he returned to his village with the reputation of being very learned
and deeply read. “Above all, they said, he was learned in the science
of the stars and of what went on yonder in the heavens and the sun and
the moon, for he told us of the cris of the sun and moon to exact
time.”

“Eclipse it is called, friend, not cris, the darkening of those two
luminaries,” said Don Quixote; but Pedro, not troubling himself with
trifles, went on with his story, saying, “Also he foretold when the
year was going to be one of abundance or estility.”

“Sterility, you mean,” said Don Quixote.

“Sterility or estility,” answered Pedro, “it is all the same in the
end. And I can tell you that by this his father and friends who
believed him grew very rich because they did as he advised them,
bidding them ‘sow barley this year, not wheat; this year you may sow
pulse and not barley; the next there will be a full oil crop, and the
three following not a drop will be got.’”

“That science is called astrology,” said Don Quixote.

“I do not know what it is called,” replied Pedro, “but I know that he
knew all this and more besides. But, to make an end, not many months
had passed after he returned from Salamanca, when one day he appeared
dressed as a shepherd with his crook and sheepskin, having put off the
long gown he wore as a scholar; and at the same time his great friend,
Ambrosio by name, who had been his companion in his studies, took to
the shepherd’s dress with him. I forgot to say that Chrysostom, who is
dead, was a great man for writing verses, so much so that he made
carols for Christmas Eve, and plays for Corpus Christi, which the young
men of our village acted, and all said they were excellent. When the
villagers saw the two scholars so unexpectedly appearing in shepherd’s
dress, they were lost in wonder, and could not guess 