 and Sancho seated themselves on the
green grass, and in peace and good fellowship finished off the contents
of the alforjas down to the bottom, so resolutely that they licked the
wrapper of the letters, merely because it smelt of cheese.

Said Tosilos to Sancho, “Beyond a doubt, Sancho my friend, this master
of thine ought to be a madman.”

“Ought!” said Sancho; “he owes no man anything; he pays for everything,
particularly when the coin is madness. I see it plain enough, and I
tell him so plain enough; but what’s the use? especially now that it is
all over with him, for here he is beaten by the Knight of the White
Moon.”

Tosilos begged him to explain what had happened him, but Sancho replied
that it would not be good manners to leave his master waiting for him;
and that some other day if they met there would be time enough for
that; and then getting up, after shaking his doublet and brushing the
crumbs out of his beard, he drove Dapple on before him, and bidding
adieu to Tosilos left him and rejoined his master, who was waiting for
him under the shade of a tree.



p66e.jpg (29K)



CHAPTER LXVII.
OF THE RESOLUTION DON QUIXOTE FORMED TO TURN SHEPHERD AND TAKE TO A
LIFE IN THE FIELDS WHILE THE YEAR FOR WHICH HE HAD GIVEN HIS WORD WAS
RUNNING ITS COURSE; WITH OTHER EVENTS TRULY DELECTABLE AND HAPPY




p67a.jpg (145K)

Full Size



If a multitude of reflections used to harass Don Quixote before he had
been overthrown, a great many more harassed him since his fall. He was
under the shade of a tree, as has been said, and there, like flies on
honey, thoughts came crowding upon him and stinging him. Some of them
turned upon the disenchantment of Dulcinea, others upon the life he was
about to lead in his enforced retirement. Sancho came up and spoke in
high praise of the generous disposition of the lacquey Tosilos.

“Is it possible, Sancho,” said Don Quixote, “that thou dost still think
that he yonder is a real lacquey? Apparently it has escaped thy memory
that thou hast seen Dulcinea turned and transformed into a peasant
wench, and the Knight of the Mirrors into the bachelor Carrasco; all
the work of the enchanters that persecute me. But tell me now, didst
thou ask this Tosilos, as thou callest him, what has become of
Altisidora, did she weep over my absence, or has she already consigned
to oblivion the love thoughts that used to afflict her when I was
present?”

“The thoughts that I had,” said Sancho, “were not such as to leave time
for asking fool’s questions. Body o’ me, señor! is your worship in a
condition now to inquire into other people’s thoughts, above all love
thoughts?”

“Look ye, Sancho,” said Don Quixote, “there is a great difference
between what is done out of love and what is done out of gratitude. A
knight may very possibly be proof against love; but it is impossible,
strictly speaking, for him to be ungrateful. Altisidora, to all
appearance, loved me truly; she gave me the three kerchiefs thou
knowest of; she wept at my departure, she cursed me, she abused me,
casting shame to the winds she bewailed herself in public; all signs
that she adored me; for the wrath of lovers always ends in curses. I
had no hopes to give her, nor treasures to offer her, for mine are
given to Dulcinea, and the treasures of knights-errant are like those
of the fairies,’ illusory and deceptive; all I can give her is the
place in my memory I keep for her, without prejudice, however, to that
which I hold devoted to Dulcinea, whom thou art wronging by thy
remissness in whipping thyself and scourging that flesh—would that I
saw it eaten by wolves—which would rather keep itself for the worms
than for the relief of that poor lady.”

“Señor,” replied Sancho, “if the truth is to be told, I cannot persuade
myself that the whipping of my backside has anything to do with the
disenchantment of the enchanted; it is like saying, ‘If your head aches
rub ointment on you