lf a dozen come, there may be one among them who
alone will suffice to destroy the entire might of the Turk. Give me
your attention and follow me. Is it, pray, any new thing for a single
knight-errant to demolish an army of two hundred thousand men, as if
they all had but one throat or were made of sugar paste? Nay, tell me,
how many histories are there filled with these marvels? If only (in an
evil hour for me: I don’t speak for anyone else) the famous Don
Belianis were alive now, or anyone of the innumerable progeny of Amadis
of Gaul! If any these were alive to-day, and were to come face to face
with the Turk, by my faith, I would not give much for the Turk’s
chance. But God will have regard for his people, and will provide
someone, who, if not so valiant as the knights-errant of yore, at least
will not be inferior to them in spirit; but God knows what I mean, and
I say no more.”

“Alas!” exclaimed the niece at this, “may I die if my master does not
want to turn knight-errant again;” to which Don Quixote replied, “A
knight-errant I shall die, and let the Turk come down or go up when he
likes, and in as strong force as he can, once more I say, God knows
what I mean.” But here the barber said, “I ask your worships to give me
leave to tell a short story of something that happened in Seville,
which comes so pat to the purpose just now that I should like greatly
to tell it.” Don Quixote gave him leave, and the rest prepared to
listen, and he began thus:

“In the madhouse at Seville there was a man whom his relations had
placed there as being out of his mind. He was a graduate of Osuna in
canon law; but even if he had been of Salamanca, it was the opinion of
most people that he would have been mad all the same. This graduate,
after some years of confinement, took it into his head that he was sane
and in his full senses, and under this impression wrote to the
Archbishop, entreating him earnestly, and in very correct language, to
have him released from the misery in which he was living; for by God’s
mercy he had now recovered his lost reason, though his relations, in
order to enjoy his property, kept him there, and, in spite of the
truth, would make him out to be mad until his dying day. The
Archbishop, moved by repeated sensible, well-written letters, directed
one of his chaplains to make inquiry of the madhouse as to the truth of
the licentiate’s statements, and to have an interview with the madman
himself, and, if it should appear that he was in his senses, to take
him out and restore him to liberty. The chaplain did so, and the
governor assured him that the man was still mad, and that though he
often spoke like a highly intelligent person, he would in the end break
out into nonsense that in quantity and quality counterbalanced all the
sensible things he had said before, as might be easily tested by
talking to him. The chaplain resolved to try the experiment, and
obtaining access to the madman conversed with him for an hour or more,
during the whole of which time he never uttered a word that was
incoherent or absurd, but, on the contrary, spoke so rationally that
the chaplain was compelled to believe him to be sane. Among other
things, he said the governor was against him, not to lose the presents
his relations made him for reporting him still mad but with lucid
intervals; and that the worst foe he had in his misfortune was his
large property; for in order to enjoy it his enemies disparaged and
threw doubts upon the mercy our Lord had shown him in turning him from
a brute beast into a man. In short, he spoke in such a way that he cast
suspicion on the governor, and made his relations appear covetous and
heartless, and himself so rational that the chaplain determined to take
him away with him that the Archbishop might see him, and ascertain for
himself the truth of the matter. Yielding to this conviction, the
worthy chaplain begged the governor to have the clothes in whic