e now.”

“Nay,” said the barber, “I can do just as well to carry them to the
yard or to the hearth, and there is a very good fire there.”

“What! your worship would burn my books!” said the landlord.

“Only these two,” said the curate, “Don Cirongilio, and Felixmarte.”

“Are my books, then, heretics or phlegmatics that you want to burn
them?” said the landlord.

“Schismatics you mean, friend,” said the barber, “not phlegmatics.”

“That’s it,” said the landlord; “but if you want to burn any, let it be
that about the Great Captain and that Diego García; for I would rather
have a child of mine burnt than either of the others.”

“Brother,” said the curate, “those two books are made up of lies, and
are full of folly and nonsense; but this of the Great Captain is a true
history, and contains the deeds of Gonzalo Hernandez of Cordova, who by
his many and great achievements earned the title all over the world of
the Great Captain, a famous and illustrious name, and deserved by him
alone; and this Diego García de Paredes was a distinguished knight of
the city of Trujillo in Estremadura, a most gallant soldier, and of
such bodily strength that with one finger he stopped a mill-wheel in
full motion; and posted with a two-handed sword at the foot of a bridge
he kept the whole of an immense army from passing over it, and achieved
such other exploits that if, instead of his relating them himself with
the modesty of a knight and of one writing his own history, some free
and unbiased writer had recorded them, they would have thrown into the
shade all the deeds of the Hectors, Achilleses, and Rolands.”



c32b.jpg (395K)

Full Size




“Tell that to my father,” said the landlord. “There’s a thing to be
astonished at! Stopping a mill-wheel! By God your worship should read
what I have read of Felixmarte of Hircania, how with one single
backstroke he cleft five giants asunder through the middle as if they
had been made of bean-pods like the little friars the children make;
and another time he attacked a very great and powerful army, in which
there were more than a million six hundred thousand soldiers, all armed
from head to foot, and he routed them all as if they had been flocks of
sheep.”



c32c.jpg (341K)

Full Size




“And then, what do you say to the good Cirongilio of Thrace, that was
so stout and bold; as may be seen in the book, where it is related that
as he was sailing along a river there came up out of the midst of the
water against him a fiery serpent, and he, as soon as he saw it, flung
himself upon it and got astride of its scaly shoulders, and squeezed
its throat with both hands with such force that the serpent, finding he
was throttling it, had nothing for it but to let itself sink to the
bottom of the river, carrying with it the knight who would not let go
his hold; and when they got down there he found himself among palaces
and gardens so pretty that it was a wonder to see; and then the serpent
changed itself into an old ancient man, who told him such things as
were never heard. Hold your peace, señor; for if you were to hear this
you would go mad with delight. A couple of figs for your Great Captain
and your Diego García!”

Hearing this Dorothea said in a whisper to Cardenio, “Our landlord is
almost fit to play a second part to Don Quixote.”

“I think so,” said Cardenio, “for, as he shows, he accepts it as a
certainty that everything those books relate took place exactly as it
is written down; and the barefooted friars themselves would not
persuade him to the contrary.”

“But consider, brother,” said the curate once more, “there never was
any Felixmarte of Hircania in the world, nor any Cirongilio of Thrace,
or any of the other knights of the same sort, that the books of
chivalry talk of; the whole thing is the fabrication and invention of
idle wits, devised by them for the purpose you describe of beguiling
the time, as your reapers do wh