accord that he had made love to her.

A few days later Anselmo returned to his house and did not perceive
what it had lost, that which he so lightly treated and so highly
prized. He went at once to see Lothario, and found him at home; they
embraced each other, and Anselmo asked for the tidings of his life or
his death.

“The tidings I have to give thee, Anselmo my friend,” said Lothario,
“are that thou dost possess a wife that is worthy to be the pattern and
crown of all good wives. The words that I have addressed to her were
borne away on the wind, my promises have been despised, my presents
have been refused, such feigned tears as I shed have been turned into
open ridicule. In short, as Camilla is the essence of all beauty, so is
she the treasure-house where purity dwells, and gentleness and modesty
abide with all the virtues that can confer praise, honour, and
happiness upon a woman. Take back thy money, my friend; here it is, and
I have had no need to touch it, for the chastity of Camilla yields not
to things so base as gifts or promises. Be content, Anselmo, and
refrain from making further proof; and as thou hast passed dryshod
through the sea of those doubts and suspicions that are and may be
entertained of women, seek not to plunge again into the deep ocean of
new embarrassments, or with another pilot make trial of the goodness
and strength of the bark that Heaven has granted thee for thy passage
across the sea of this world; but reckon thyself now safe in port, moor
thyself with the anchor of sound reflection, and rest in peace until
thou art called upon to pay that debt which no nobility on earth can
escape paying.”

Anselmo was completely satisfied by the words of Lothario, and believed
them as fully as if they had been spoken by an oracle; nevertheless he
begged of him not to relinquish the undertaking, were it but for the
sake of curiosity and amusement; though thenceforward he need not make
use of the same earnest endeavours as before; all he wished him to do
was to write some verses to her, praising her under the name of
Chloris, for he himself would give her to understand that he was in
love with a lady to whom he had given that name to enable him to sing
her praises with the decorum due to her modesty; and if Lothario were
unwilling to take the trouble of writing the verses he would compose
them himself.

“That will not be necessary,” said Lothario, “for the muses are not
such enemies of mine but that they visit me now and then in the course
of the year. Do thou tell Camilla what thou hast proposed about a
pretended amour of mine; as for the verses I will make them, and if not
as good as the subject deserves, they shall be at least the best I can
produce.” An agreement to this effect was made between the friends, the
ill-advised one and the treacherous, and Anselmo returning to his house
asked Camilla the question she already wondered he had not asked
before—what it was that had caused her to write the letter she had sent
him. Camilla replied that it had seemed to her that Lothario looked at
her somewhat more freely than when he had been at home; but that now
she was undeceived and believed it to have been only her own
imagination, for Lothario now avoided seeing her, or being alone with
her. Anselmo told her she might be quite easy on the score of that
suspicion, for he knew that Lothario was in love with a damsel of rank
in the city whom he celebrated under the name of Chloris, and that even
if he were not, his fidelity and their great friendship left no room
for fear. Had not Camilla, however, been informed beforehand by
Lothario that this love for Chloris was a pretence, and that he himself
had told Anselmo of it in order to be able sometimes to give utterance
to the praises of Camilla herself, no doubt she would have fallen into
the despairing toils of jealousy; but being forewarned she received the
startling news without uneasiness.

The nex