k in such a way that I cannot understand you, Señora Clara;
explain yourself more clearly, and tell me what is this you are saying
about hearts and places and this musician whose voice has so moved you?
But do not tell me anything now; I do not want to lose the pleasure I
get from listening to the singer by giving my attention to your
transports, for I perceive he is beginning to sing a new strain and a
new air.”

“Let him, in Heaven’s name,” returned Clara; and not to hear him she
stopped both ears with her hands, at which Dorothea was again
surprised; but turning her attention to the song she found that it ran
in this fashion:

Sweet Hope, my stay,
That onward to the goal of thy intent
Dost make thy way,
Heedless of hindrance or impediment,
Have thou no fear
If at each step thou findest death is near.

No victory,
No joy of triumph doth the faint heart know;
Unblest is he
That a bold front to Fortune dares not show,
But soul and sense
In bondage yieldeth up to indolence.

If Love his wares
Do dearly sell, his right must be contest;
What gold compares
With that whereon his stamp he hath imprest?
And all men know
What costeth little that we rate but low.

Love resolute
Knows not the word “impossibility;”
And though my suit
Beset by endless obstacles I see,
Yet no despair
Shall hold me bound to earth while heaven is there.


Here the voice ceased and Clara’s sobs began afresh, all which excited
Dorothea’s curiosity to know what could be the cause of singing so
sweet and weeping so bitter, so she again asked her what it was she was
going to say before. On this Clara, afraid that Luscinda might overhear
her, winding her arms tightly round Dorothea put her mouth so close to
her ear that she could speak without fear of being heard by anyone
else, and said:

“This singer, dear señora, is the son of a gentleman of Aragon, lord of
two villages, who lives opposite my father’s house at Madrid; and
though my father had curtains to the windows of his house in winter,
and lattice-work in summer, in some way—I know not how—this gentleman,
who was pursuing his studies, saw me, whether in church or elsewhere, I
cannot tell, and, in fact, fell in love with me, and gave me to know it
from the windows of his house, with so many signs and tears that I was
forced to believe him, and even to love him, without knowing what it
was he wanted of me. One of the signs he used to make me was to link
one hand in the other, to show me he wished to marry me; and though I
should have been glad if that could be, being alone and motherless I
knew not whom to open my mind to, and so I left it as it was, showing
him no favour, except when my father, and his too, were from home, to
raise the curtain or the lattice a little and let him see me plainly,
at which he would show such delight that he seemed as if he were going
mad. Meanwhile the time for my father’s departure arrived, which he
became aware of, but not from me, for I had never been able to tell him
of it. He fell sick, of grief I believe, and so the day we were going
away I could not see him to take farewell of him, were it only with the
eyes. But after we had been two days on the road, on entering the
posada of a village a day’s journey from this, I saw him at the inn
door in the dress of a muleteer, and so well disguised, that if I did
not carry his image graven on my heart it would have been impossible
for me to recognise him. But I knew him, and I was surprised, and glad;
he watched me, unsuspected by my father, from whom he always hides
himself when he crosses my path on the road, or in the posadas where we
halt; and, as I know what he is, and reflect that for love of me he
makes this journey on foot in all this hardship, I am ready to die of
sorrow; and where he sets foot there I set my eyes. I know not with
what object he has come; or how he could have got away from his father,
who loves him beyond measure, having no ot