m her
seat, crossing her hands upon her bosom, bowing her head and bending
her body as a sign that she returned thanks. From her silence they
concluded that she must be a Moor and unable to speak a Christian
tongue.

At this moment the captive came up, having been until now otherwise
engaged, and seeing that they all stood round his companion and that
she made no reply to what they addressed to her, he said, “Ladies, this
damsel hardly understands my language and can speak none but that of
her own country, for which reason she does not and cannot answer what
has been asked of her.”

“Nothing has been asked of her,” returned Luscinda; “she has only been
offered our company for this evening and a share of the quarters we
occupy, where she shall be made as comfortable as the circumstances
allow, with the good-will we are bound to show all strangers that stand
in need of it, especially if it be a woman to whom the service is
rendered.”

“On her part and my own, señora,” replied the captive, “I kiss your
hands, and I esteem highly, as I ought, the favour you have offered,
which, on such an occasion and coming from persons of your appearance,
is, it is plain to see, a very great one.”

“Tell me, señor,” said Dorothea, “is this lady a Christian or a Moor?
for her dress and her silence lead us to imagine that she is what we
could wish she was not.”

“In dress and outwardly,” said he, “she is a Moor, but at heart she is
a thoroughly good Christian, for she has the greatest desire to become
one.”

“Then she has not been baptised?” returned Luscinda.

“There has been no opportunity for that,” replied the captive, “since
she left Algiers, her native country and home; and up to the present
she has not found herself in any such imminent danger of death as to
make it necessary to baptise her before she has been instructed in all
the ceremonies our holy mother Church ordains; but, please God, ere
long she shall be baptised with the solemnity befitting her which is
higher than her dress or mine indicates.”

By these words he excited a desire in all who heard him, to know who
the Moorish lady and the captive were, but no one liked to ask just
then, seeing that it was a fitter moment for helping them to rest
themselves than for questioning them about their lives. Dorothea took
the Moorish lady by the hand and leading her to a seat beside herself,
requested her to remove her veil. She looked at the captive as if to
ask him what they meant and what she was to do. He said to her in
Arabic that they asked her to take off her veil, and thereupon she
removed it and disclosed a countenance so lovely, that to Dorothea she
seemed more beautiful than Luscinda, and to Luscinda more beautiful
than Dorothea, and all the bystanders felt that if any beauty could
compare with theirs it was the Moorish lady’s, and there were even
those who were inclined to give it somewhat the preference. And as it
is the privilege and charm of beauty to win the heart and secure
good-will, all forthwith became eager to show kindness and attention to
the lovely Moor.

Don Fernando asked the captive what her name was, and he replied that
it was Lela Zoraida; but the instant she heard him, she guessed what
the Christian had asked, and said hastily, with some displeasure and
energy, “No, not Zoraida; Maria, Maria!” giving them to understand that
she was called “Maria” and not “Zoraida.” These words, and the touching
earnestness with which she uttered them, drew more than one tear from
some of the listeners, particularly the women, who are by nature
tender-hearted and compassionate. Luscinda embraced her affectionately,
saying, “Yes, yes, Maria, Maria,” to which the Moor replied, “Yes, yes,
Maria; Zoraida macange,” which means “not Zoraida.”

Night was now approaching, and by the orders of those who accompanied
Don Fernando the landlord had taken care and pains to prepare for them
the best supper that was in his