s platonic, not going beyond a modest look, and even that so
seldom that I can safely swear I have not seen her four times in all
these twelve years I have been loving her more than the light of these
eyes that the earth will one day devour; and perhaps even of those four
times she has not once perceived that I was looking at her: such is the
retirement and seclusion in which her father Lorenzo Corchuelo and her
mother Aldonza Nogales have brought her up.”

“So, so!” said Sancho; “Lorenzo Corchuelo’s daughter is the lady
Dulcinea del Toboso, otherwise called Aldonza Lorenzo?”

“She it is,” said Don Quixote, “and she it is that is worthy to be lady
of the whole universe.”

“I know her well,” said Sancho, “and let me tell you she can fling a
crowbar as well as the lustiest lad in all the town. Giver of all good!
but she is a brave lass, and a right and stout one, and fit to be
helpmate to any knight-errant that is or is to be, who may make her his
lady: the whoreson wench, what sting she has and what a voice! I can
tell you one day she posted herself on the top of the belfry of the
village to call some labourers of theirs that were in a ploughed field
of her father’s, and though they were better than half a league off
they heard her as well as if they were at the foot of the tower; and
the best of her is that she is not a bit prudish, for she has plenty of
affability, and jokes with everybody, and has a grin and a jest for
everything. So, Sir Knight of the Rueful Countenance, I say you not
only may and ought to do mad freaks for her sake, but you have a good
right to give way to despair and hang yourself; and no one who knows of
it but will say you did well, though the devil should take you; and I
wish I were on my road already, simply to see her, for it is many a day
since I saw her, and she must be altered by this time, for going about
the fields always, and the sun and the air spoil women’s looks greatly.
But I must own the truth to your worship, Señor Don Quixote; until now
I have been under a great mistake, for I believed truly and honestly
that the lady Dulcinea must be some princess your worship was in love
with, or some person great enough to deserve the rich presents you have
sent her, such as the Biscayan and the galley slaves, and many more no
doubt, for your worship must have won many victories in the time when I
was not yet your squire. But all things considered, what good can it do
the lady Aldonza Lorenzo, I mean the lady Dulcinea del Toboso, to have
the vanquished your worship sends or will send coming to her and going
down on their knees before her? Because maybe when they came she’d be
hackling flax or threshing on the threshing floor, and they’d be
ashamed to see her, and she’d laugh, or resent the present.”

“I have before now told thee many times, Sancho,” said Don Quixote,
“that thou art a mighty great chatterer, and that with a blunt wit thou
art always striving at sharpness; but to show thee what a fool thou art
and how rational I am, I would have thee listen to a short story. Thou
must know that a certain widow, fair, young, independent, and rich, and
above all free and easy, fell in love with a sturdy strapping young
lay-brother; his superior came to know of it, and one day said to the
worthy widow by way of brotherly remonstrance, ‘I am surprised, señora,
and not without good reason, that a woman of such high standing, so
fair, and so rich as you are, should have fallen in love with such a
mean, low, stupid fellow as So-and-so, when in this house there are so
many masters, graduates, and divinity students from among whom you
might choose as if they were a lot of pears, saying, ‘This one I’ll
take, that I won’t take;’ but she replied to him with great
sprightliness and candour, ‘My dear sir, you are very much mistaken,
and your ideas are very old-fashioned, if you think that I have made a
bad choice in So-and-so, fool as he seems; because for 