rs to his servants and his vassals, would see
himself to-day buried in a pit without a soul to help him, or servant
or vassal to come to his relief? Here must we perish with hunger, my
ass and myself, if indeed we don’t die first, he of his bruises and
injuries, and I of grief and sorrow. At any rate I’ll not be as lucky
as my master Don Quixote of La Mancha, when he went down into the cave
of that enchanted Montesinos, where he found people to make more of him
than if he had been in his own house; for it seems he came in for a
table laid out and a bed ready made. There he saw fair and pleasant
visions, but here I’ll see, I imagine, toads and adders. Unlucky wretch
that I am, what an end my follies and fancies have come to! They’ll
take up my bones out of this, when it is heaven’s will that I’m found,
picked clean, white and polished, and my good Dapple’s with them, and
by that, perhaps, it will be found out who we are, at least by such as
have heard that Sancho Panza never separated from his ass, nor his ass
from Sancho Panza. Unlucky wretches, I say again, that our hard fate
should not let us die in our own country and among our own people,
where if there was no help for our misfortune, at any rate there would
be someone to grieve for it and to close our eyes as we passed away! O
comrade and friend, how ill have I repaid thy faithful services!
Forgive me, and entreat Fortune, as well as thou canst, to deliver us
out of this miserable strait we are both in; and I promise to put a
crown of laurel on thy head, and make thee look like a poet laureate,
and give thee double feeds.”



p55b.jpg (273K)

Full Size



In this strain did Sancho bewail himself, and his ass listened to him,
but answered him never a word, such was the distress and anguish the
poor beast found himself in. At length, after a night spent in bitter
moanings and lamentations, day came, and by its light Sancho perceived
that it was wholly impossible to escape out of that pit without help,
and he fell to bemoaning his fate and uttering loud shouts to find out
if there was anyone within hearing; but all his shouting was only
crying in the wilderness, for there was not a soul anywhere in the
neighbourhood to hear him, and then at last he gave himself up for
dead. Dapple was lying on his back, and Sancho helped him to his feet,
which he was scarcely able to keep; and then taking a piece of bread
out of his alforjas which had shared their fortunes in the fall, he
gave it to the ass, to whom it was not unwelcome, saying to him as if
he understood him, “With bread all sorrows are less.”

And now he perceived on one side of the pit a hole large enough to
admit a person if he stooped and squeezed himself into a small compass.
Sancho made for it, and entered it by creeping, and found it wide and
spacious on the inside, which he was able to see as a ray of sunlight
that penetrated what might be called the roof showed it all plainly. He
observed too that it opened and widened out into another spacious
cavity; seeing which he made his way back to where the ass was, and
with a stone began to pick away the clay from the hole until in a short
time he had made room for the beast to pass easily, and this
accomplished, taking him by the halter, he proceeded to traverse the
cavern to see if there was any outlet at the other end. He advanced,
sometimes in the dark, sometimes without light, but never without fear;
“God Almighty help me!” said he to himself; “this that is a
misadventure to me would make a good adventure for my master Don
Quixote. He would have been sure to take these depths and dungeons for
flowery gardens or the palaces of Galiana, and would have counted upon
issuing out of this darkness and imprisonment into some blooming
meadow; but I, unlucky that I am, hopeless and spiritless, expect at
every step another pit deeper than the first to open under my feet and
swallow me up for good; ‘welcome evil, i