equence, when the money came he refused it
scornfully as being altogether insufficient. The owner of Rodrigo,
however, was more easily satisfied; ransom was accepted in his case,
and it was arranged between the brothers that he should return to Spain
and procure a vessel in which he was to come back to Algiers and take
off Miguel and as many of their comrades as possible. This was not the
first attempt to escape that Cervantes had made. Soon after the
commencement of his captivity he induced several of his companions to
join him in trying to reach Oran, then a Spanish post, on foot; but
after the first day’s journey, the Moor who had agreed to act as their
guide deserted them, and they had no choice but to return. The second
attempt was more disastrous. In a garden outside the city on the
sea-shore, he constructed, with the help of the gardener, a Spaniard, a
hiding-place, to which he brought, one by one, fourteen of his
fellow-captives, keeping them there in secrecy for several months, and
supplying them with food through a renegade known as El Dorador, “the
Gilder.” How he, a captive himself, contrived to do all this, is one of
the mysteries of the story. Wild as the project may appear, it was very
nearly successful. The vessel procured by Rodrigo made its appearance
off the coast, and under cover of night was proceeding to take off the
refugees, when the crew were alarmed by a passing fishing boat, and
beat a hasty retreat. On renewing the attempt shortly afterwards, they,
or a portion of them at least, were taken prisoners, and just as the
poor fellows in the garden were exulting in the thought that in a few
moments more freedom would be within their grasp, they found themselves
surrounded by Turkish troops, horse and foot. The Dorador had revealed
the whole scheme to the Dey Hassan.

When Cervantes saw what had befallen them, he charged his companions to
lay all the blame upon him, and as they were being bound he declared
aloud that the whole plot was of his contriving, and that nobody else
had any share in it. Brought before the Dey, he said the same. He was
threatened with impalement and with torture; and as cutting off ears
and noses were playful freaks with the Algerines, it may be conceived
what their tortures were like; but nothing could make him swerve from
his original statement that he and he alone was responsible. The upshot
was that the unhappy gardener was hanged by his master, and the
prisoners taken possession of by the Dey, who, however, afterwards
restored most of them to their masters, but kept Cervantes, paying Dali
Mami 500 crowns for him. He felt, no doubt, that a man of such
resource, energy, and daring, was too dangerous a piece of property to
be left in private hands; and he had him heavily ironed and lodged in
his own prison. If he thought that by these means he could break the
spirit or shake the resolution of his prisoner, he was soon undeceived,
for Cervantes contrived before long to despatch a letter to the
Governor of Oran, entreating him to send him someone that could be
trusted, to enable him and three other gentlemen, fellow-captives of
his, to make their escape; intending evidently to renew his first
attempt with a more trustworthy guide. Unfortunately the Moor who
carried the letter was stopped just outside Oran, and the letter being
found upon him, he was sent back to Algiers, where by the order of the
Dey he was promptly impaled as a warning to others, while Cervantes was
condemned to receive two thousand blows of the stick, a number which
most likely would have deprived the world of “Don Quixote,” had not
some persons, who they were we know not, interceded on his behalf.

After this he seems to have been kept in still closer confinement than
before, for nearly two years passed before he made another attempt.
This time his plan was to purchase, by the aid of a Spanish renegade
and two Valencian merchants resident in Algiers, an 