 have made my wife bear so
patiently all my wanderings on highways and byways, in the service of
my master, Don Quixote; for if after all this time I had come back to
the house without a rap and without the ass, it would have been a poor
look-out for me; and if anyone wants to know anything more about me,
here I am, ready to answer the king himself in person; and it is no
affair of anyone’s whether I took or did not take, whether I spent or
did not spend; for the whacks that were given me in these journeys were
to be paid for in money, even if they were valued at no more than four
maravedis apiece, another hundred crowns would not pay me for half of
them. Let each look to himself and not try to make out white black, and
black white; for each of us is as God made him, aye, and often worse.”

“I will take care,” said Carrasco, “to impress upon the author of the
history that, if he prints it again, he must not forget what worthy
Sancho has said, for it will raise it a good span higher.”

“Is there anything else to correct in the history, señor bachelor?”
asked Don Quixote.

“No doubt there is,” replied he; “but not anything that will be of the
same importance as those I have mentioned.”

“Does the author promise a second part at all?” said Don Quixote.

“He does promise one,” replied Samson; “but he says he has not found
it, nor does he know who has got it; and we cannot say whether it will
appear or not; and so, on that head, as some say that no second part
has ever been good, and others that enough has been already written
about Don Quixote, it is thought there will be no second part; though
some, who are jovial rather than saturnine, say, ‘Let us have more
Quixotades, let Don Quixote charge and Sancho chatter, and no matter
what it may turn out, we shall be satisfied with that.’”

“And what does the author mean to do?” said Don Quixote.

“What?” replied Samson; “why, as soon as he has found the history which
he is now searching for with extraordinary diligence, he will at once
give it to the press, moved more by the profit that may accrue to him
from doing so than by any thought of praise.”

Whereat Sancho observed, “The author looks for money and profit, does
he? It will be a wonder if he succeeds, for it will be only hurry,
hurry, with him, like the tailor on Easter Eve; and works done in a
hurry are never finished as perfectly as they ought to be. Let master
Moor, or whatever he is, pay attention to what he is doing, and I and
my master will give him as much grouting ready to his hand, in the way
of adventures and accidents of all sorts, as would make up not only one
second part, but a hundred. The good man fancies, no doubt, that we are
fast asleep in the straw here, but let him hold up our feet to be shod
and he will see which foot it is we go lame on. All I say is, that if
my master would take my advice, we would be now afield, redressing
outrages and righting wrongs, as is the use and custom of good
knights-errant.”

Sancho had hardly uttered these words when the neighing of Rocinante
fell upon their ears, which neighing Don Quixote accepted as a happy
omen, and he resolved to make another sally in three or four days from
that time. Announcing his intention to the bachelor, he asked his
advice as to the quarter in which he ought to commence his expedition,
and the bachelor replied that in his opinion he ought to go to the
kingdom of Aragon, and the city of Saragossa, where there were to be
certain solemn joustings at the festival of St. George, at which he
might win renown above all the knights of Aragon, which would be
winning it above all the knights of the world. He commended his very
praiseworthy and gallant resolution, but admonished him to proceed with
greater caution in encountering dangers, because his life did not
belong to him, but to all those who had need of him to protect and aid
them in their misfortunes.

“There’s where it is, what I ab