set as marble, and his eyebrows converged
till they almost touched over his nose. Lucy lay motionless, and did not
seem to have strength to speak, so for a while we were all silent. Then
Van Helsing beckoned to me, and we went gently out of the room. The
instant we had closed the door he stepped quickly along the passage to
the next door, which was open. Then he pulled me quickly in with him and
closed the door. “My God!” he said; “this is dreadful. There is no time
to be lost. She will die for sheer want of blood to keep the heart’s
action as it should be. There must be transfusion of blood at once. Is
it you or me?”

“I am younger and stronger, Professor. It must be me.”

“Then get ready at once. I will bring up my bag. I am prepared.”

I went downstairs with him, and as we were going there was a knock at
the hall-door. When we reached the hall the maid had just opened the
door, and Arthur was stepping quickly in. He rushed up to me, saying in
an eager whisper:--

“Jack, I was so anxious. I read between the lines of your letter, and
have been in an agony. The dad was better, so I ran down here to see for
myself. Is not that gentleman Dr. Van Helsing? I am so thankful to you,
sir, for coming.” When first the Professor’s eye had lit upon him he had
been angry at his interruption at such a time; but now, as he took in
his stalwart proportions and recognised the strong young manhood which
seemed to emanate from him, his eyes gleamed. Without a pause he said to
him gravely as he held out his hand:--

“Sir, you have come in time. You are the lover of our dear miss. She is
bad, very, very bad. Nay, my child, do not go like that.” For he
suddenly grew pale and sat down in a chair almost fainting. “You are to
help her. You can do more than any that live, and your courage is your
best help.”

“What can I do?” asked Arthur hoarsely. “Tell me, and I shall do it. My
life is hers, and I would give the last drop of blood in my body for
her.” The Professor has a strongly humorous side, and I could from old
knowledge detect a trace of its origin in his answer:--

“My young sir, I do not ask so much as that--not the last!”

“What shall I do?” There was fire in his eyes, and his open nostril
quivered with intent. Van Helsing slapped him on the shoulder. “Come!”
he said. “You are a man, and it is a man we want. You are better than
me, better than my friend John.” Arthur looked bewildered, and the
Professor went on by explaining in a kindly way:--

“Young miss is bad, very bad. She wants blood, and blood she must have
or die. My friend John and I have consulted; and we are about to perform
what we call transfusion of blood--to transfer from full veins of one to
the empty veins which pine for him. John was to give his blood, as he is
the more young and strong than me”--here Arthur took my hand and wrung
it hard in silence--“but, now you are here, you are more good than us,
old or young, who toil much in the world of thought. Our nerves are not
so calm and our blood not so bright than yours!” Arthur turned to him
and said:--

“If you only knew how gladly I would die for her you would
understand----”

He stopped, with a sort of choke in his voice.

“Good boy!” said Van Helsing. “In the not-so-far-off you will be happy
that you have done all for her you love. Come now and be silent. You
shall kiss her once before it is done, but then you must go; and you
must leave at my sign. Say no word to Madame; you know how it is with
her! There must be no shock; any knowledge of this would be one. Come!”

We all went up to Lucy’s room. Arthur by direction remained outside.
Lucy turned her head and looked at us, but said nothing. She was not
asleep, but she was simply too weak to make the effort. Her eyes spoke
to us; that was all. Van Helsing took some things from his bag and laid
them on a little table out of sight. Then he mixed a narcotic, and
coming over to the bed, said cheerily:--