ates off the coast of
Andres, April, 1854, æt. 30.” When I came back Mr. Swales went on:--

“Who brought him home, I wonder, to hap him here? Murdered off the coast
of Andres! an’ you consated his body lay under! Why, I could name ye a
dozen whose bones lie in the Greenland seas above”--he pointed
northwards--“or where the currents may have drifted them. There be the
steans around ye. Ye can, with your young eyes, read the small-print of
the lies from here. This Braithwaite Lowrey--I knew his father, lost in
the _Lively_ off Greenland in ’20; or Andrew Woodhouse, drowned in the
same seas in 1777; or John Paxton, drowned off Cape Farewell a year
later; or old John Rawlings, whose grandfather sailed with me, drowned
in the Gulf of Finland in ’50. Do ye think that all these men will have
to make a rush to Whitby when the trumpet sounds? I have me antherums
aboot it! I tell ye that when they got here they’d be jommlin’ an’
jostlin’ one another that way that it ’ud be like a fight up on the ice
in the old days, when we’d be at one another from daylight to dark, an’
tryin’ to tie up our cuts by the light of the aurora borealis.” This was
evidently local pleasantry, for the old man cackled over it, and his
cronies joined in with gusto.

“But,” I said, “surely you are not quite correct, for you start on the
assumption that all the poor people, or their spirits, will have to
take their tombstones with them on the Day of Judgment. Do you think
that will be really necessary?”

“Well, what else be they tombstones for? Answer me that, miss!”

“To please their relatives, I suppose.”

“To please their relatives, you suppose!” This he said with intense
scorn. “How will it pleasure their relatives to know that lies is wrote
over them, and that everybody in the place knows that they be lies?” He
pointed to a stone at our feet which had been laid down as a slab, on
which the seat was rested, close to the edge of the cliff. “Read the
lies on that thruff-stean,” he said. The letters were upside down to me
from where I sat, but Lucy was more opposite to them, so she leant over
and read:--

“Sacred to the memory of George Canon, who died, in the hope of a
glorious resurrection, on July, 29, 1873, falling from the rocks at
Kettleness. This tomb was erected by his sorrowing mother to her dearly
beloved son. ‘He was the only son of his mother, and she was a widow.’
Really, Mr. Swales, I don’t see anything very funny in that!” She spoke
her comment very gravely and somewhat severely.

“Ye don’t see aught funny! Ha! ha! But that’s because ye don’t gawm the
sorrowin’ mother was a hell-cat that hated him because he was
acrewk’d--a regular lamiter he was--an’ he hated her so that he
committed suicide in order that she mightn’t get an insurance she put on
his life. He blew nigh the top of his head off with an old musket that
they had for scarin’ the crows with. ’Twarn’t for crows then, for it
brought the clegs and the dowps to him. That’s the way he fell off the
rocks. And, as to hopes of a glorious resurrection, I’ve often heard him
say masel’ that he hoped he’d go to hell, for his mother was so pious
that she’d be sure to go to heaven, an’ he didn’t want to addle where
she was. Now isn’t that stean at any rate”--he hammered it with his
stick as he spoke--“a pack of lies? and won’t it make Gabriel keckle
when Geordie comes pantin’ up the grees with the tombstean balanced on
his hump, and asks it to be took as evidence!”

I did not know what to say, but Lucy turned the conversation as she
said, rising up:--

“Oh, why did you tell us of this? It is my favourite seat, and I cannot
leave it; and now I find I must go on sitting over the grave of a
suicide.”

“That won’t harm ye, my pretty; an’ it may make poor Geordie gladsome to
have so trim a lass sittin’ on his lap. That won’t hurt ye. Why, I’ve
sat here off an’ on for nigh twenty years past, an’ it hasn’t done me
no harm. Don’t ye fash ab