on their knees and
prayed.

       *       *       *       *       *

_1 November, evening._--No news all day; we have found nothing of the
kind we seek. We have now passed into the Bistritza; and if we are wrong
in our surmise our chance is gone. We have over-hauled every boat, big
and little. Early this morning, one crew took us for a Government boat,
and treated us accordingly. We saw in this a way of smoothing matters,
so at Fundu, where the Bistritza runs into the Sereth, we got a
Roumanian flag which we now fly conspicuously. With every boat which we
have over-hauled since then this trick has succeeded; we have had every
deference shown to us, and not once any objection to whatever we chose
to ask or do. Some of the Slovaks tell us that a big boat passed them,
going at more than usual speed as she had a double crew on board. This
was before they came to Fundu, so they could not tell us whether the
boat turned into the Bistritza or continued on up the Sereth. At Fundu
we could not hear of any such boat, so she must have passed there in the
night. I am feeling very sleepy; the cold is perhaps beginning to tell
upon me, and nature must have rest some time. Godalming insists that he
shall keep the first watch. God bless him for all his goodness to poor
dear Mina and me.

       *       *       *       *       *

_2 November, morning._--It is broad daylight. That good fellow would not
wake me. He says it would have been a sin to, for I slept peacefully and
was forgetting my trouble. It seems brutally selfish to me to have slept
so long, and let him watch all night; but he was quite right. I am a new
man this morning; and, as I sit here and watch him sleeping, I can do
all that is necessary both as to minding the engine, steering, and
keeping watch. I can feel that my strength and energy are coming back to
me. I wonder where Mina is now, and Van Helsing. They should have got to
Veresti about noon on Wednesday. It would take them some time to get the
carriage and horses; so if they had started and travelled hard, they
would be about now at the Borgo Pass. God guide and help them! I am
afraid to think what may happen. If we could only go faster! but we
cannot; the engines are throbbing and doing their utmost. I wonder how
Dr. Seward and Mr. Morris are getting on. There seem to be endless
streams running down the mountains into this river, but as none of them
are very large--at present, at all events, though they are terrible
doubtless in winter and when the snow melts--the horsemen may not have
met much obstruction. I hope that before we get to Strasba we may see
them; for if by that time we have not overtaken the Count, it may be
necessary to take counsel together what to do next.


_Dr. Seward’s Diary._

_2 November._--Three days on the road. No news, and no time to write it
if there had been, for every moment is precious. We have had only the
rest needful for the horses; but we are both bearing it wonderfully.
Those adventurous days of ours are turning up useful. We must push on;
we shall never feel happy till we get the launch in sight again.

       *       *       *       *       *

_3 November._--We heard at Fundu that the launch had gone up the
Bistritza. I wish it wasn’t so cold. There are signs of snow coming; and
if it falls heavy it will stop us. In such case we must get a sledge and
go on, Russian fashion.

       *       *       *       *       *

_4 November._--To-day we heard of the launch having been detained by an
accident when trying to force a way up the rapids. The Slovak boats get
up all right, by aid of a rope and steering with knowledge. Some went up
only a few hours before. Godalming is an amateur fitter himself, and
evidently it was he who put the launch in trim again. Finally, they got
up the rapids all right, with local help, and are off on the chase
afresh. I fear that the boat is not any better for the accident; the
peasantry te