hat we read. Imagine
him here—the very end of the world, a sea the colour of lead, a sky the
colour of smoke, a kind of ship about as rigid as a concertina—and
going up this river with stores, or orders, or what you like.
Sand-banks, marshes, forests, savages,—precious little to eat fit for a
civilized man, nothing but Thames water to drink. No Falernian wine
here, no going ashore. Here and there a military camp lost in a
wilderness, like a needle in a bundle of hay—cold, fog, tempests,
disease, exile, and death—death skulking in the air, in the water, in
the bush. They must have been dying like flies here. Oh, yes—he did it.
Did it very well, too, no doubt, and without thinking much about it
either, except afterwards to brag of what he had gone through in his
time, perhaps. They were men enough to face the darkness. And perhaps
he was cheered by keeping his eye on a chance of promotion to the fleet
at Ravenna by and by, if he had good friends in Rome and survived the
awful climate. Or think of a decent young citizen in a toga—perhaps too
much dice, you know—coming out here in the train of some prefect, or
tax-gatherer, or trader even, to mend his fortunes. Land in a swamp,
march through the woods, and in some inland post feel the savagery, the
utter savagery, had closed round him—all that mysterious life of the
wilderness that stirs in the forest, in the jungles, in the hearts of
wild men. There’s no initiation either into such mysteries. He has to
live in the midst of the incomprehensible, which is also detestable.
And it has a fascination, too, that goes to work upon him. The
fascination of the abomination—you know, imagine the growing regrets,
the longing to escape, the powerless disgust, the surrender, the hate.”

He paused.

“Mind,” he began again, lifting one arm from the elbow, the palm of the
hand outwards, so that, with his legs folded before him, he had the
pose of a Buddha preaching in European clothes and without a
lotus-flower—“Mind, none of us would feel exactly like this. What saves
us is efficiency—the devotion to efficiency. But these chaps were not
much account, really. They were no colonists; their administration was
merely a squeeze, and nothing more, I suspect. They were conquerors,
and for that you want only brute force—nothing to boast of, when you
have it, since your strength is just an accident arising from the
weakness of others. They grabbed what they could get for the sake of
what was to be got. It was just robbery with violence, aggravated
murder on a great scale, and men going at it blind—as is very proper
for those who tackle a darkness. The conquest of the earth, which
mostly means the taking it away from those who have a different
complexion or slightly flatter noses than ourselves, is not a pretty
thing when you look into it too much. What redeems it is the idea only.
An idea at the back of it; not a sentimental pretence but an idea; and
an unselfish belief in the idea—something you can set up, and bow down
before, and offer a sacrifice to....”

He broke off. Flames glided in the river, small green flames, red
flames, white flames, pursuing, overtaking, joining, crossing each
other—then separating slowly or hastily. The traffic of the great city
went on in the deepening night upon the sleepless river. We looked on,
waiting patiently—there was nothing else to do till the end of the
flood; but it was only after a long silence, when he said, in a
hesitating voice, “I suppose you fellows remember I did once turn
fresh-water sailor for a bit,” that we knew we were fated, before the
ebb began to run, to hear about one of Marlow’s inconclusive
experiences.

“I don’t want to bother you much with what happened to me personally,”
he began, showing in this remark the weakness of many tellers of tales
who seem so often unaware of what their audience would like best to
hear; “yet to understand the effect of it on me you ought to know how I
go