angroves,
that seemed to writhe at us in the extremity of an impotent despair.
Nowhere did we stop long enough to get a particularized impression, but
the general sense of vague and oppressive wonder grew upon me. It was
like a weary pilgrimage amongst hints for nightmares.

“It was upward of thirty days before I saw the mouth of the big river.
We anchored off the seat of the government. But my work would not begin
till some two hundred miles farther on. So as soon as I could I made a
start for a place thirty miles higher up.

“I had my passage on a little sea-going steamer. Her captain was a
Swede, and knowing me for a seaman, invited me on the bridge. He was a
young man, lean, fair, and morose, with lanky hair and a shuffling
gait. As we left the miserable little wharf, he tossed his head
contemptuously at the shore. ‘Been living there?’ he asked. I said,
‘Yes.’ ‘Fine lot these government chaps—are they not?’ he went on,
speaking English with great precision and considerable bitterness. ‘It
is funny what some people will do for a few francs a month. I wonder
what becomes of that kind when it goes upcountry?’ I said to him I
expected to see that soon. ‘So-o-o!’ he exclaimed. He shuffled athwart,
keeping one eye ahead vigilantly. ‘Don’t be too sure,’ he continued.
‘The other day I took up a man who hanged himself on the road. He was a
Swede, too.’ ‘Hanged himself! Why, in God’s name?’ I cried. He kept on
looking out watchfully. ‘Who knows? The sun too much for him, or the
country perhaps.’

“At last we opened a reach. A rocky cliff appeared, mounds of turned-up
earth by the shore, houses on a hill, others with iron roofs, amongst a
waste of excavations, or hanging to the declivity. A continuous noise
of the rapids above hovered over this scene of inhabited devastation. A
lot of people, mostly black and naked, moved about like ants. A jetty
projected into the river. A blinding sunlight drowned all this at times
in a sudden recrudescence of glare. ‘There’s your Company’s station,’
said the Swede, pointing to three wooden barrack-like structures on the
rocky slope. ‘I will send your things up. Four boxes did you say? So.
Farewell.’

“I came upon a boiler wallowing in the grass, then found a path leading
up the hill. It turned aside for the boulders, and also for an
undersized railway-truck lying there on its back with its wheels in the
air. One was off. The thing looked as dead as the carcass of some
animal. I came upon more pieces of decaying machinery, a stack of rusty
rails. To the left a clump of trees made a shady spot, where dark
things seemed to stir feebly. I blinked, the path was steep. A horn
tooted to the right, and I saw the black people run. A heavy and dull
detonation shook the ground, a puff of smoke came out of the cliff, and
that was all. No change appeared on the face of the rock. They were
building a railway. The cliff was not in the way or anything; but this
objectless blasting was all the work going on.

“A slight clinking behind me made me turn my head. Six black men
advanced in a file, toiling up the path. They walked erect and slow,
balancing small baskets full of earth on their heads, and the clink
kept time with their footsteps. Black rags were wound round their
loins, and the short ends behind waggled to and fro like tails. I could
see every rib, the joints of their limbs were like knots in a rope;
each had an iron collar on his neck, and all were connected together
with a chain whose bights swung between them, rhythmically clinking.
Another report from the cliff made me think suddenly of that ship of
war I had seen firing into a continent. It was the same kind of ominous
voice; but these men could by no stretch of imagination be called
enemies. They were called criminals, and the outraged law, like the
bursting shells, had come to them, an insoluble mystery from the sea.
All their meagre breasts panted together, the violently dilated
nost