n hurried whispers as to which bank.
‘Left.’ ‘no, no; how can you? Right, right, of course.’ ‘It is very
serious,’ said the manager’s voice behind me; ‘I would be desolated if
anything should happen to Mr. Kurtz before we came up.’ I looked at
him, and had not the slightest doubt he was sincere. He was just the
kind of man who would wish to preserve appearances. That was his
restraint. But when he muttered something about going on at once, I did
not even take the trouble to answer him. I knew, and he knew, that it
was impossible. Were we to let go our hold of the bottom, we would be
absolutely in the air—in space. We wouldn’t be able to tell where we
were going to—whether up or down stream, or across—till we fetched
against one bank or the other—and then we wouldn’t know at first which
it was. Of course I made no move. I had no mind for a smash-up. You
couldn’t imagine a more deadly place for a shipwreck. Whether we
drowned at once or not, we were sure to perish speedily in one way or
another. ‘I authorize you to take all the risks,’ he said, after a
short silence. ‘I refuse to take any,’ I said shortly; which was just
the answer he expected, though its tone might have surprised him.
‘Well, I must defer to your judgment. You are captain,’ he said with
marked civility. I turned my shoulder to him in sign of my
appreciation, and looked into the fog. How long would it last? It was
the most hopeless lookout. The approach to this Kurtz grubbing for
ivory in the wretched bush was beset by as many dangers as though he
had been an enchanted princess sleeping in a fabulous castle. ‘Will
they attack, do you think?’ asked the manager, in a confidential tone.

“I did not think they would attack, for several obvious reasons. The
thick fog was one. If they left the bank in their canoes they would get
lost in it, as we would be if we attempted to move. Still, I had also
judged the jungle of both banks quite impenetrable—and yet eyes were in
it, eyes that had seen us. The riverside bushes were certainly very
thick; but the undergrowth behind was evidently penetrable. However,
during the short lift I had seen no canoes anywhere in the
reach—certainly not abreast of the steamer. But what made the idea of
attack inconceivable to me was the nature of the noise—of the cries we
had heard. They had not the fierce character boding immediate hostile
intention. Unexpected, wild, and violent as they had been, they had
given me an irresistible impression of sorrow. The glimpse of the
steamboat had for some reason filled those savages with unrestrained
grief. The danger, if any, I expounded, was from our proximity to a
great human passion let loose. Even extreme grief may ultimately vent
itself in violence—but more generally takes the form of apathy....

“You should have seen the pilgrims stare! They had no heart to grin, or
even to revile me: but I believe they thought me gone mad—with fright,
maybe. I delivered a regular lecture. My dear boys, it was no good
bothering. Keep a lookout? Well, you may guess I watched the fog for
the signs of lifting as a cat watches a mouse; but for anything else
our eyes were of no more use to us than if we had been buried miles
deep in a heap of cotton-wool. It felt like it, too—choking, warm,
stifling. Besides, all I said, though it sounded extravagant, was
absolutely true to fact. What we afterwards alluded to as an attack was
really an attempt at repulse. The action was very far from being
aggressive—it was not even defensive, in the usual sense: it was
undertaken under the stress of desperation, and in its essence was
purely protective.

“It developed itself, I should say, two hours after the fog lifted, and
its commencement was at a spot, roughly speaking, about a mile and a
half below Kurtz’s station. We had just floundered and flopped round a
bend, when I saw an islet, a mere grassy hummock of bright green, in
the middle of the stream. It was the only th