riers could have
brought all that was wanted to set that steamboat afloat.

“He was becoming confidential now, but I fancy my unresponsive attitude
must have exasperated him at last, for he judged it necessary to inform
me he feared neither God nor devil, let alone any mere man. I said I
could see that very well, but what I wanted was a certain quantity of
rivets—and rivets were what really Mr. Kurtz wanted, if he had only
known it. Now letters went to the coast every week.... ‘My dear sir,’
he cried, ‘I write from dictation.’ I demanded rivets. There was a
way—for an intelligent man. He changed his manner; became very cold,
and suddenly began to talk about a hippopotamus; wondered whether
sleeping on board the steamer (I stuck to my salvage night and day) I
wasn’t disturbed. There was an old hippo that had the bad habit of
getting out on the bank and roaming at night over the station grounds.
The pilgrims used to turn out in a body and empty every rifle they
could lay hands on at him. Some even had sat up o’ nights for him. All
this energy was wasted, though. ‘That animal has a charmed life,’ he
said; ‘but you can say this only of brutes in this country. No man—you
apprehend me?—no man here bears a charmed life.’ He stood there for a
moment in the moonlight with his delicate hooked nose set a little
askew, and his mica eyes glittering without a wink, then, with a curt
Good-night, he strode off. I could see he was disturbed and
considerably puzzled, which made me feel more hopeful than I had been
for days. It was a great comfort to turn from that chap to my
influential friend, the battered, twisted, ruined, tin-pot steamboat. I
clambered on board. She rang under my feet like an empty Huntley &
Palmer biscuit-tin kicked along a gutter; she was nothing so solid in
make, and rather less pretty in shape, but I had expended enough hard
work on her to make me love her. No influential friend would have
served me better. She had given me a chance to come out a bit—to find
out what I could do. No, I don’t like work. I had rather laze about and
think of all the fine things that can be done. I don’t like work—no man
does—but I like what is in the work—the chance to find yourself. Your
own reality—for yourself, not for others—what no other man can ever
know. They can only see the mere show, and never can tell what it
really means.

“I was not surprised to see somebody sitting aft, on the deck, with his
legs dangling over the mud. You see I rather chummed with the few
mechanics there were in that station, whom the other pilgrims naturally
despised—on account of their imperfect manners, I suppose. This was the
foreman—a boiler-maker by trade—a good worker. He was a lank, bony,
yellow-faced man, with big intense eyes. His aspect was worried, and
his head was as bald as the palm of my hand; but his hair in falling
seemed to have stuck to his chin, and had prospered in the new
locality, for his beard hung down to his waist. He was a widower with
six young children (he had left them in charge of a sister of his to
come out there), and the passion of his life was pigeon-flying. He was
an enthusiast and a connoisseur. He would rave about pigeons. After
work hours he used sometimes to come over from his hut for a talk about
his children and his pigeons; at work, when he had to crawl in the mud
under the bottom of the steamboat, he would tie up that beard of his in
a kind of white serviette he brought for the purpose. It had loops to
go over his ears. In the evening he could be seen squatted on the bank
rinsing that wrapper in the creek with great care, then spreading it
solemnly on a bush to dry.

“I slapped him on the back and shouted, ‘We shall have rivets!’ He
scrambled to his feet exclaiming, ‘No! Rivets!’ as though he couldn’t
believe his ears. Then in a low voice, ‘You... eh?’ I don’t know why we
behaved like lunatics. I put my finger to the side of my nose and
nodded mysteriously