ill—and then the
white shutter came down again, smoothly, as if sliding in greased
grooves. I ordered the chain, which we had begun to heave in, to be
paid out again. Before it stopped running with a muffled rattle, a cry,
a very loud cry, as of infinite desolation, soared slowly in the opaque
air. It ceased. A complaining clamour, modulated in savage discords,
filled our ears. The sheer unexpectedness of it made my hair stir under
my cap. I don’t know how it struck the others: to me it seemed as
though the mist itself had screamed, so suddenly, and apparently from
all sides at once, did this tumultuous and mournful uproar arise. It
culminated in a hurried outbreak of almost intolerably excessive
shrieking, which stopped short, leaving us stiffened in a variety of
silly attitudes, and obstinately listening to the nearly as appalling
and excessive silence. ‘Good God! What is the meaning—’ stammered at my
elbow one of the pilgrims—a little fat man, with sandy hair and red
whiskers, who wore sidespring boots, and pink pyjamas tucked into his
socks. Two others remained open-mouthed a whole minute, then dashed
into the little cabin, to rush out incontinently and stand darting
scared glances, with Winchesters at ‘ready’ in their hands. What we
could see was just the steamer we were on, her outlines blurred as
though she had been on the point of dissolving, and a misty strip of
water, perhaps two feet broad, around her—and that was all. The rest of
the world was nowhere, as far as our eyes and ears were concerned. Just
nowhere. Gone, disappeared; swept off without leaving a whisper or a
shadow behind.

“I went forward, and ordered the chain to be hauled in short, so as to
be ready to trip the anchor and move the steamboat at once if
necessary. ‘Will they attack?’ whispered an awed voice. ‘We will be all
butchered in this fog,’ murmured another. The faces twitched with the
strain, the hands trembled slightly, the eyes forgot to wink. It was
very curious to see the contrast of expressions of the white men and of
the black fellows of our crew, who were as much strangers to that part
of the river as we, though their homes were only eight hundred miles
away. The whites, of course greatly discomposed, had besides a curious
look of being painfully shocked by such an outrageous row. The others
had an alert, naturally interested expression; but their faces were
essentially quiet, even those of the one or two who grinned as they
hauled at the chain. Several exchanged short, grunting phrases, which
seemed to settle the matter to their satisfaction. Their headman, a
young, broad-chested black, severely draped in dark-blue fringed
cloths, with fierce nostrils and his hair all done up artfully in oily
ringlets, stood near me. ‘Aha!’ I said, just for good fellowship’s
sake. ‘Catch ’im,’ he snapped, with a bloodshot widening of his eyes
and a flash of sharp teeth—‘catch ’im. Give ’im to us.’ ‘To you, eh?’ I
asked; ‘what would you do with them?’ ‘Eat ’im!’ he said curtly, and,
leaning his elbow on the rail, looked out into the fog in a dignified
and profoundly pensive attitude. I would no doubt have been properly
horrified, had it not occurred to me that he and his chaps must be very
hungry: that they must have been growing increasingly hungry for at
least this month past. They had been engaged for six months (I don’t
think a single one of them had any clear idea of time, as we at the end
of countless ages have. They still belonged to the beginnings of
time—had no inherited experience to teach them as it were), and of
course, as long as there was a piece of paper written over in
accordance with some farcical law or other made down the river, it
didn’t enter anybody’s head to trouble how they would live. Certainly
they had brought with them some rotten hippo-meat, which couldn’t have
lasted very long, anyway, even if the pilgrims hadn’t, in the midst of
a shocking hullabaloo, thrown a consider