t out there, what I saw, how I went up that river to the place where
I first met the poor chap. It was the farthest point of navigation and
the culminating point of my experience. It seemed somehow to throw a
kind of light on everything about me—and into my thoughts. It was
sombre enough, too—and pitiful—not extraordinary in any way—not very
clear either. No, not very clear. And yet it seemed to throw a kind of
light.

“I had then, as you remember, just returned to London after a lot of
Indian Ocean, Pacific, China Seas—a regular dose of the East—six years
or so, and I was loafing about, hindering you fellows in your work and
invading your homes, just as though I had got a heavenly mission to
civilize you. It was very fine for a time, but after a bit I did get
tired of resting. Then I began to look for a ship—I should think the
hardest work on earth. But the ships wouldn’t even look at me. And I
got tired of that game, too.

“Now when I was a little chap I had a passion for maps. I would look
for hours at South America, or Africa, or Australia, and lose myself in
all the glories of exploration. At that time there were many blank
spaces on the earth, and when I saw one that looked particularly
inviting on a map (but they all look that) I would put my finger on it
and say, ‘When I grow up I will go there.’ The North Pole was one of
these places, I remember. Well, I haven’t been there yet, and shall not
try now. The glamour’s off. Other places were scattered about the
hemispheres. I have been in some of them, and... well, we won’t talk
about that. But there was one yet—the biggest, the most blank, so to
speak—that I had a hankering after.

“True, by this time it was not a blank space any more. It had got
filled since my boyhood with rivers and lakes and names. It had ceased
to be a blank space of delightful mystery—a white patch for a boy to
dream gloriously over. It had become a place of darkness. But there was
in it one river especially, a mighty big river, that you could see on
the map, resembling an immense snake uncoiled, with its head in the
sea, its body at rest curving afar over a vast country, and its tail
lost in the depths of the land. And as I looked at the map of it in a
shop-window, it fascinated me as a snake would a bird—a silly little
bird. Then I remembered there was a big concern, a Company for trade on
that river. Dash it all! I thought to myself, they can’t trade without
using some kind of craft on that lot of fresh water—steamboats! Why
shouldn’t I try to get charge of one? I went on along Fleet Street, but
could not shake off the idea. The snake had charmed me.

“You understand it was a Continental concern, that Trading society; but
I have a lot of relations living on the Continent, because it’s cheap
and not so nasty as it looks, they say.

“I am sorry to own I began to worry them. This was already a fresh
departure for me. I was not used to get things that way, you know. I
always went my own road and on my own legs where I had a mind to go. I
wouldn’t have believed it of myself; but, then—you see—I felt somehow I
must get there by hook or by crook. So I worried them. The men said ‘My
dear fellow,’ and did nothing. Then—would you believe it?—I tried the
women. I, Charlie Marlow, set the women to work—to get a job. Heavens!
Well, you see, the notion drove me. I had an aunt, a dear enthusiastic
soul. She wrote: ‘It will be delightful. I am ready to do anything,
anything for you. It is a glorious idea. I know the wife of a very high
personage in the Administration, and also a man who has lots of
influence with,’ etc. She was determined to make no end of fuss to get
me appointed skipper of a river steamboat, if such was my fancy.

“I got my appointment—of course; and I got it very quick. It appears
the Company had received news that one of their captains had been
killed in a scuffle with the natives. This was my chance, and it made
me the more an