 a truckle-bed with a sick man (some invalid agent from
upcountry) was put in there, he exhibited a gentle annoyance. ‘The
groans of this sick person,’ he said, ‘distract my attention. And
without that it is extremely difficult to guard against clerical errors
in this climate.’

“One day he remarked, without lifting his head, ‘In the interior you
will no doubt meet Mr. Kurtz.’ On my asking who Mr. Kurtz was, he said
he was a first-class agent; and seeing my disappointment at this
information, he added slowly, laying down his pen, ‘He is a very
remarkable person.’ Further questions elicited from him that Mr. Kurtz
was at present in charge of a trading-post, a very important one, in
the true ivory-country, at ‘the very bottom of there. Sends in as much
ivory as all the others put together...’ He began to write again. The
sick man was too ill to groan. The flies buzzed in a great peace.

“Suddenly there was a growing murmur of voices and a great tramping of
feet. A caravan had come in. A violent babble of uncouth sounds burst
out on the other side of the planks. All the carriers were speaking
together, and in the midst of the uproar the lamentable voice of the
chief agent was heard ‘giving it up’ tearfully for the twentieth time
that day.... He rose slowly. ‘What a frightful row,’ he said. He
crossed the room gently to look at the sick man, and returning, said to
me, ‘He does not hear.’ ‘What! Dead?’ I asked, startled. ‘No, not yet,’
he answered, with great composure. Then, alluding with a toss of the
head to the tumult in the station-yard, ‘When one has got to make
correct entries, one comes to hate those savages—hate them to the
death.’ He remained thoughtful for a moment. ‘When you see Mr. Kurtz’
he went on, ‘tell him from me that everything here’—he glanced at the
deck—‘is very satisfactory. I don’t like to write to him—with those
messengers of ours you never know who may get hold of your letter—at
that Central Station.’ He stared at me for a moment with his mild,
bulging eyes. ‘Oh, he will go far, very far,’ he began again. ‘He will
be a somebody in the Administration before long. They, above—the
Council in Europe, you know—mean him to be.’

“He turned to his work. The noise outside had ceased, and presently in
going out I stopped at the door. In the steady buzz of flies the
homeward-bound agent was lying finished and insensible; the other, bent
over his books, was making correct entries of perfectly correct
transactions; and fifty feet below the doorstep I could see the still
tree-tops of the grove of death.

“Next day I left that station at last, with a caravan of sixty men, for
a two-hundred-mile tramp.

“No use telling you much about that. Paths, paths, everywhere; a
stamped-in network of paths spreading over the empty land, through the
long grass, through burnt grass, through thickets, down and up chilly
ravines, up and down stony hills ablaze with heat; and a solitude, a
solitude, nobody, not a hut. The population had cleared out a long time
ago. Well, if a lot of mysterious niggers armed with all kinds of
fearful weapons suddenly took to travelling on the road between Deal
and Gravesend, catching the yokels right and left to carry heavy loads
for them, I fancy every farm and cottage thereabouts would get empty
very soon. Only here the dwellings were gone, too. Still I passed
through several abandoned villages. There’s something pathetically
childish in the ruins of grass walls. Day after day, with the stamp and
shuffle of sixty pair of bare feet behind me, each pair under a 60-lb.
load. Camp, cook, sleep, strike camp, march. Now and then a carrier
dead in harness, at rest in the long grass near the path, with an empty
water-gourd and his long staff lying by his side. A great silence
around and above. Perhaps on some quiet night the tremor of far-off
drums, sinking, swelling, a tremor vast, faint; a sound weird,
appealing, suggestive, and wild—and perhaps 