are a brother seaman and—’ ‘All right,’
said I, after a time. ‘Mr. Kurtz’s reputation is safe with me.’ I did
not know how truly I spoke.

“He informed me, lowering his voice, that it was Kurtz who had ordered
the attack to be made on the steamer. ‘He hated sometimes the idea of
being taken away—and then again.... But I don’t understand these
matters. I am a simple man. He thought it would scare you away—that you
would give it up, thinking him dead. I could not stop him. Oh, I had an
awful time of it this last month.’ ‘Very well,’ I said. ‘He is all
right now.’ ‘Ye-e-es,’ he muttered, not very convinced apparently.
‘Thanks,’ said I; ‘I shall keep my eyes open.’ ‘But quiet-eh?’ he urged
anxiously. ‘It would be awful for his reputation if anybody here—’ I
promised a complete discretion with great gravity. ‘I have a canoe and
three black fellows waiting not very far. I am off. Could you give me a
few Martini-Henry cartridges?’ I could, and did, with proper secrecy.
He helped himself, with a wink at me, to a handful of my tobacco.
‘Between sailors—you know—good English tobacco.’ At the door of the
pilot-house he turned round—‘I say, haven’t you a pair of shoes you
could spare?’ He raised one leg. ‘Look.’ The soles were tied with
knotted strings sandalwise under his bare feet. I rooted out an old
pair, at which he looked with admiration before tucking it under his
left arm. One of his pockets (bright red) was bulging with cartridges,
from the other (dark blue) peeped ‘Towson’s Inquiry,’ etc., etc. He
seemed to think himself excellently well equipped for a renewed
encounter with the wilderness. ‘Ah! I’ll never, never meet such a man
again. You ought to have heard him recite poetry—his own, too, it was,
he told me. Poetry!’ He rolled his eyes at the recollection of these
delights. ‘Oh, he enlarged my mind!’ ‘Good-bye,’ said I. He shook hands
and vanished in the night. Sometimes I ask myself whether I had ever
really seen him—whether it was possible to meet such a phenomenon!...

“When I woke up shortly after midnight his warning came to my mind with
its hint of danger that seemed, in the starred darkness, real enough to
make me get up for the purpose of having a look round. On the hill a
big fire burned, illuminating fitfully a crooked corner of the
station-house. One of the agents with a picket of a few of our blacks,
armed for the purpose, was keeping guard over the ivory; but deep
within the forest, red gleams that wavered, that seemed to sink and
rise from the ground amongst confused columnar shapes of intense
blackness, showed the exact position of the camp where Mr. Kurtz’s
adorers were keeping their uneasy vigil. The monotonous beating of a
big drum filled the air with muffled shocks and a lingering vibration.
A steady droning sound of many men chanting each to himself some weird
incantation came out from the black, flat wall of the woods as the
humming of bees comes out of a hive, and had a strange narcotic effect
upon my half-awake senses. I believe I dozed off leaning over the rail,
till an abrupt burst of yells, an overwhelming outbreak of a pent-up
and mysterious frenzy, woke me up in a bewildered wonder. It was cut
short all at once, and the low droning went on with an effect of
audible and soothing silence. I glanced casually into the little cabin.
A light was burning within, but Mr. Kurtz was not there.

“I think I would have raised an outcry if I had believed my eyes. But I
didn’t believe them at first—the thing seemed so impossible. The fact
is I was completely unnerved by a sheer blank fright, pure abstract
terror, unconnected with any distinct shape of physical danger. What
made this emotion so overpowering was—how shall I define it?—the moral
shock I received, as if something altogether monstrous, intolerable to
thought and odious to the soul, had been thrust upon me unexpectedly.
This lasted of course the merest fraction of a second, and then the
usual 