at me, enormous and
vacant, a kind of blind, white flicker in the depths of the orbs, which
died out slowly. The man seemed young—almost a boy—but you know with
them it’s hard to tell. I found nothing else to do but to offer him one
of my good Swede’s ship’s biscuits I had in my pocket. The fingers
closed slowly on it and held—there was no other movement and no other
glance. He had tied a bit of white worsted round his neck—Why? Where
did he get it? Was it a badge—an ornament—a charm—a propitiatory act?
Was there any idea at all connected with it? It looked startling round
his black neck, this bit of white thread from beyond the seas.

“Near the same tree two more bundles of acute angles sat with their
legs drawn up. One, with his chin propped on his knees, stared at
nothing, in an intolerable and appalling manner: his brother phantom
rested its forehead, as if overcome with a great weariness; and all
about others were scattered in every pose of contorted collapse, as in
some picture of a massacre or a pestilence. While I stood
horror-struck, one of these creatures rose to his hands and knees, and
went off on all-fours towards the river to drink. He lapped out of his
hand, then sat up in the sunlight, crossing his shins in front of him,
and after a time let his woolly head fall on his breastbone.

“I didn’t want any more loitering in the shade, and I made haste
towards the station. When near the buildings I met a white man, in such
an unexpected elegance of get-up that in the first moment I took him
for a sort of vision. I saw a high starched collar, white cuffs, a
light alpaca jacket, snowy trousers, a clean necktie, and varnished
boots. No hat. Hair parted, brushed, oiled, under a green-lined parasol
held in a big white hand. He was amazing, and had a penholder behind
his ear.

“I shook hands with this miracle, and I learned he was the Company’s
chief accountant, and that all the book-keeping was done at this
station. He had come out for a moment, he said, ‘to get a breath of
fresh air. The expression sounded wonderfully odd, with its suggestion
of sedentary desk-life. I wouldn’t have mentioned the fellow to you at
all, only it was from his lips that I first heard the name of the man
who is so indissolubly connected with the memories of that time.
Moreover, I respected the fellow. Yes; I respected his collars, his
vast cuffs, his brushed hair. His appearance was certainly that of a
hairdresser’s dummy; but in the great demoralization of the land he
kept up his appearance. That’s backbone. His starched collars and
got-up shirt-fronts were achievements of character. He had been out
nearly three years; and, later, I could not help asking him how he
managed to sport such linen. He had just the faintest blush, and said
modestly, ‘I’ve been teaching one of the native women about the
station. It was difficult. She had a distaste for the work.’ Thus this
man had verily accomplished something. And he was devoted to his books,
which were in apple-pie order.

“Everything else in the station was in a muddle—heads, things,
buildings. Strings of dusty niggers with splay feet arrived and
departed; a stream of manufactured goods, rubbishy cottons, beads, and
brass-wire sent into the depths of darkness, and in return came a
precious trickle of ivory.

“I had to wait in the station for ten days—an eternity. I lived in a
hut in the yard, but to be out of the chaos I would sometimes get into
the accountant’s office. It was built of horizontal planks, and so
badly put together that, as he bent over his high desk, he was barred
from neck to heels with narrow strips of sunlight. There was no need to
open the big shutter to see. It was hot there, too; big flies buzzed
fiendishly, and did not sting, but stabbed. I sat generally on the
floor, while, of faultless appearance (and even slightly scented),
perching on a high stool, he wrote, he wrote. Sometimes he stood up for
exercise. When