 was
inexcusable, but then my temperature was seldom normal in these days.
My dear aunt’s endeavours to ‘nurse up my strength’ seemed altogether
beside the mark. It was not my strength that wanted nursing, it was my
imagination that wanted soothing. I kept the bundle of papers given me
by Kurtz, not knowing exactly what to do with it. His mother had died
lately, watched over, as I was told, by his Intended. A clean-shaved
man, with an official manner and wearing gold-rimmed spectacles, called
on me one day and made inquiries, at first circuitous, afterwards
suavely pressing, about what he was pleased to denominate certain
‘documents.’ I was not surprised, because I had had two rows with the
manager on the subject out there. I had refused to give up the smallest
scrap out of that package, and I took the same attitude with the
spectacled man. He became darkly menacing at last, and with much heat
argued that the Company had the right to every bit of information about
its ‘territories.’ And said he, ‘Mr. Kurtz’s knowledge of unexplored
regions must have been necessarily extensive and peculiar—owing to his
great abilities and to the deplorable circumstances in which he had
been placed: therefore—’ I assured him Mr. Kurtz’s knowledge, however
extensive, did not bear upon the problems of commerce or
administration. He invoked then the name of science. ‘It would be an
incalculable loss if,’ etc., etc. I offered him the report on the
‘Suppression of Savage Customs,’ with the postscriptum torn off. He
took it up eagerly, but ended by sniffing at it with an air of
contempt. ‘This is not what we had a right to expect,’ he remarked.
‘Expect nothing else,’ I said. ‘There are only private letters.’ He
withdrew upon some threat of legal proceedings, and I saw him no more;
but another fellow, calling himself Kurtz’s cousin, appeared two days
later, and was anxious to hear all the details about his dear
relative’s last moments. Incidentally he gave me to understand that
Kurtz had been essentially a great musician. ‘There was the making of
an immense success,’ said the man, who was an organist, I believe, with
lank grey hair flowing over a greasy coat-collar. I had no reason to
doubt his statement; and to this day I am unable to say what was
Kurtz’s profession, whether he ever had any—which was the greatest of
his talents. I had taken him for a painter who wrote for the papers, or
else for a journalist who could paint—but even the cousin (who took
snuff during the interview) could not tell me what he had been—exactly.
He was a universal genius—on that point I agreed with the old chap, who
thereupon blew his nose noisily into a large cotton handkerchief and
withdrew in senile agitation, bearing off some family letters and
memoranda without importance. Ultimately a journalist anxious to know
something of the fate of his ‘dear colleague’ turned up. This visitor
informed me Kurtz’s proper sphere ought to have been politics ‘on the
popular side.’ He had furry straight eyebrows, bristly hair cropped
short, an eyeglass on a broad ribbon, and, becoming expansive,
confessed his opinion that Kurtz really couldn’t write a bit—‘but
heavens! how that man could talk. He electrified large meetings. He had
faith—don’t you see?—he had the faith. He could get himself to believe
anything—anything. He would have been a splendid leader of an extreme
party.’ ‘What party?’ I asked. ‘Any party,’ answered the other. ‘He was
an—an—extremist.’ Did I not think so? I assented. Did I know, he asked,
with a sudden flash of curiosity, ‘what it was that had induced him to
go out there?’ ‘Yes,’ said I, and forthwith handed him the famous
Report for publication, if he thought fit. He glanced through it
hurriedly, mumbling all the time, judged ‘it would do,’ and took
himself off with this plunder.

“Thus I was left at last with a slim packet of letters and the girl’s
portrait. She struck me as beautiful—I mean she had a be