ation is proud, from Sir Francis Drake to Sir John Franklin, knights
all, titled and untitled—the great knights-errant of the sea. It had
borne all the ships whose names are like jewels flashing in the night
of time, from the _Golden Hind_ returning with her rotund flanks full
of treasure, to be visited by the Queen’s Highness and thus pass out of
the gigantic tale, to the _Erebus_ and _Terror_, bound on other
conquests—and that never returned. It had known the ships and the men.
They had sailed from Deptford, from Greenwich, from Erith—the
adventurers and the settlers; kings’ ships and the ships of men on
’Change; captains, admirals, the dark “interlopers” of the Eastern
trade, and the commissioned “generals” of East India fleets. Hunters
for gold or pursuers of fame, they all had gone out on that stream,
bearing the sword, and often the torch, messengers of the might within
the land, bearers of a spark from the sacred fire. What greatness had
not floated on the ebb of that river into the mystery of an unknown
earth!... The dreams of men, the seed of commonwealths, the germs of
empires.

The sun set; the dusk fell on the stream, and lights began to appear
along the shore. The Chapman light-house, a three-legged thing erect on
a mud-flat, shone strongly. Lights of ships moved in the fairway—a
great stir of lights going up and going down. And farther west on the
upper reaches the place of the monstrous town was still marked
ominously on the sky, a brooding gloom in sunshine, a lurid glare under
the stars.

“And this also,” said Marlow suddenly, “has been one of the dark places
of the earth.”

He was the only man of us who still “followed the sea.” The worst that
could be said of him was that he did not represent his class. He was a
seaman, but he was a wanderer, too, while most seamen lead, if one may
so express it, a sedentary life. Their minds are of the stay-at-home
order, and their home is always with them—the ship; and so is their
country—the sea. One ship is very much like another, and the sea is
always the same. In the immutability of their surroundings the foreign
shores, the foreign faces, the changing immensity of life, glide past,
veiled not by a sense of mystery but by a slightly disdainful
ignorance; for there is nothing mysterious to a seaman unless it be the
sea itself, which is the mistress of his existence and as inscrutable
as Destiny. For the rest, after his hours of work, a casual stroll or a
casual spree on shore suffices to unfold for him the secret of a whole
continent, and generally he finds the secret not worth knowing. The
yarns of seamen have a direct simplicity, the whole meaning of which
lies within the shell of a cracked nut. But Marlow was not typical (if
his propensity to spin yarns be excepted), and to him the meaning of an
episode was not inside like a kernel but outside, enveloping the tale
which brought it out only as a glow brings out a haze, in the likeness
of one of these misty halos that sometimes are made visible by the
spectral illumination of moonshine.

His remark did not seem at all surprising. It was just like Marlow. It
was accepted in silence. No one took the trouble to grunt even; and
presently he said, very slow—“I was thinking of very old times, when
the Romans first came here, nineteen hundred years ago—the other day
.... Light came out of this river since—you say Knights? Yes; but it is
like a running blaze on a plain, like a flash of lightning in the
clouds. We live in the flicker—may it last as long as the old earth
keeps rolling! But darkness was here yesterday. Imagine the feelings of
a commander of a fine—what d’ye call ’em?—trireme in the Mediterranean,
ordered suddenly to the north; run overland across the Gauls in a
hurry; put in charge of one of these craft the legionaries—a wonderful
lot of handy men they must have been, too—used to build, apparently by
the hundred, in a month or two, if we may believe w