they looked and behaved, he would get shy and mutter
something about ‘walking on all-fours.’ If you as much as smiled, he
would—though a man of sixty—offer to fight you. I would not have gone
so far as to fight for Kurtz, but I went for him near enough to a lie.
You know I hate, detest, and can’t bear a lie, not because I am
straighter than the rest of us, but simply because it appalls me. There
is a taint of death, a flavour of mortality in lies—which is exactly
what I hate and detest in the world—what I want to forget. It makes me
miserable and sick, like biting something rotten would do. Temperament,
I suppose. Well, I went near enough to it by letting the young fool
there believe anything he liked to imagine as to my influence in
Europe. I became in an instant as much of a pretence as the rest of the
bewitched pilgrims. This simply because I had a notion it somehow would
be of help to that Kurtz whom at the time I did not see—you understand.
He was just a word for me. I did not see the man in the name any more
than you do. Do you see him? Do you see the story? Do you see anything?
It seems to me I am trying to tell you a dream—making a vain attempt,
because no relation of a dream can convey the dream-sensation, that
commingling of absurdity, surprise, and bewilderment in a tremor of
struggling revolt, that notion of being captured by the incredible
which is of the very essence of dreams....”

He was silent for a while.

“... No, it is impossible; it is impossible to convey the
life-sensation of any given epoch of one’s existence—that which makes
its truth, its meaning—its subtle and penetrating essence. It is
impossible. We live, as we dream—alone....”

He paused again as if reflecting, then added:

“Of course in this you fellows see more than I could then. You see me,
whom you know....”

It had become so pitch dark that we listeners could hardly see one
another. For a long time already he, sitting apart, had been no more to
us than a voice. There was not a word from anybody. The others might
have been asleep, but I was awake. I listened, I listened on the watch
for the sentence, for the word, that would give me the clue to the
faint uneasiness inspired by this narrative that seemed to shape itself
without human lips in the heavy night-air of the river.

“... Yes—I let him run on,” Marlow began again, “and think what he
pleased about the powers that were behind me. I did! And there was
nothing behind me! There was nothing but that wretched, old, mangled
steamboat I was leaning against, while he talked fluently about ‘the
necessity for every man to get on.’ ‘And when one comes out here, you
conceive, it is not to gaze at the moon.’ Mr. Kurtz was a ‘universal
genius,’ but even a genius would find it easier to work with ‘adequate
tools—intelligent men.’ He did not make bricks—why, there was a
physical impossibility in the way—as I was well aware; and if he did
secretarial work for the manager, it was because ‘no sensible man
rejects wantonly the confidence of his superiors.’ Did I see it? I saw
it. What more did I want? What I really wanted was rivets, by heaven!
Rivets. To get on with the work—to stop the hole. Rivets I wanted.
There were cases of them down at the coast—cases—piled up—burst—split!
You kicked a loose rivet at every second step in that station-yard on
the hillside. Rivets had rolled into the grove of death. You could fill
your pockets with rivets for the trouble of stooping down—and there
wasn’t one rivet to be found where it was wanted. We had plates that
would do, but nothing to fasten them with. And every week the
messenger, a long negro, letter-bag on shoulder and staff in hand, left
our station for the coast. And several times a week a coast caravan
came in with trade goods—ghastly glazed calico that made you shudder
only to look at it, glass beads value about a penny a quart, confounded
spotted cotton handkerchiefs. And no rivets. Three car