autiful
expression. I know that the sunlight can be made to lie, too, yet one
felt that no manipulation of light and pose could have conveyed the
delicate shade of truthfulness upon those features. She seemed ready to
listen without mental reservation, without suspicion, without a thought
for herself. I concluded I would go and give her back her portrait and
those letters myself. Curiosity? Yes; and also some other feeling
perhaps. All that had been Kurtz’s had passed out of my hands: his
soul, his body, his station, his plans, his ivory, his career. There
remained only his memory and his Intended—and I wanted to give that up,
too, to the past, in a way—to surrender personally all that remained of
him with me to that oblivion which is the last word of our common fate.
I don’t defend myself. I had no clear perception of what it was I
really wanted. Perhaps it was an impulse of unconscious loyalty, or the
fulfilment of one of those ironic necessities that lurk in the facts of
human existence. I don’t know. I can’t tell. But I went.

“I thought his memory was like the other memories of the dead that
accumulate in every man’s life—a vague impress on the brain of shadows
that had fallen on it in their swift and final passage; but before the
high and ponderous door, between the tall houses of a street as still
and decorous as a well-kept alley in a cemetery, I had a vision of him
on the stretcher, opening his mouth voraciously, as if to devour all
the earth with all its mankind. He lived then before me; he lived as
much as he had ever lived—a shadow insatiable of splendid appearances,
of frightful realities; a shadow darker than the shadow of the night,
and draped nobly in the folds of a gorgeous eloquence. The vision
seemed to enter the house with me—the stretcher, the phantom-bearers,
the wild crowd of obedient worshippers, the gloom of the forests, the
glitter of the reach between the murky bends, the beat of the drum,
regular and muffled like the beating of a heart—the heart of a
conquering darkness. It was a moment of triumph for the wilderness, an
invading and vengeful rush which, it seemed to me, I would have to keep
back alone for the salvation of another soul. And the memory of what I
had heard him say afar there, with the horned shapes stirring at my
back, in the glow of fires, within the patient woods, those broken
phrases came back to me, were heard again in their ominous and
terrifying simplicity. I remembered his abject pleading, his abject
threats, the colossal scale of his vile desires, the meanness, the
torment, the tempestuous anguish of his soul. And later on I seemed to
see his collected languid manner, when he said one day, ‘This lot of
ivory now is really mine. The Company did not pay for it. I collected
it myself at a very great personal risk. I am afraid they will try to
claim it as theirs though. H’m. It is a difficult case. What do you
think I ought to do—resist? Eh? I want no more than justice.’... He
wanted no more than justice—no more than justice. I rang the bell
before a mahogany door on the first floor, and while I waited he seemed
to stare at me out of the glassy panel—stare with that wide and immense
stare embracing, condemning, loathing all the universe. I seemed to
hear the whispered cry, “The horror! The horror!”

“The dusk was falling. I had to wait in a lofty drawing-room with three
long windows from floor to ceiling that were like three luminous and
bedraped columns. The bent gilt legs and backs of the furniture shone
in indistinct curves. The tall marble fireplace had a cold and
monumental whiteness. A grand piano stood massively in a corner; with
dark gleams on the flat surfaces like a sombre and polished
sarcophagus. A high door opened—closed. I rose.

“She came forward, all in black, with a pale head, floating towards me
in the dusk. She was in mourning. It was more than a year since his
death, more than a year since the news cam