n there more than a
year—waiting. It seems he could not make bricks without something, I
don’t know what—straw maybe. Anyway, it could not be found there and as
it was not likely to be sent from Europe, it did not appear clear to me
what he was waiting for. An act of special creation perhaps. However,
they were all waiting—all the sixteen or twenty pilgrims of them—for
something; and upon my word it did not seem an uncongenial occupation,
from the way they took it, though the only thing that ever came to them
was disease—as far as I could see. They beguiled the time by
back-biting and intriguing against each other in a foolish kind of way.
There was an air of plotting about that station, but nothing came of
it, of course. It was as unreal as everything else—as the philanthropic
pretence of the whole concern, as their talk, as their government, as
their show of work. The only real feeling was a desire to get appointed
to a trading-post where ivory was to be had, so that they could earn
percentages. They intrigued and slandered and hated each other only on
that account—but as to effectually lifting a little finger—oh, no. By
heavens! there is something after all in the world allowing one man to
steal a horse while another must not look at a halter. Steal a horse
straight out. Very well. He has done it. Perhaps he can ride. But there
is a way of looking at a halter that would provoke the most charitable
of saints into a kick.

“I had no idea why he wanted to be sociable, but as we chatted in there
it suddenly occurred to me the fellow was trying to get at something—in
fact, pumping me. He alluded constantly to Europe, to the people I was
supposed to know there—putting leading questions as to my acquaintances
in the sepulchral city, and so on. His little eyes glittered like mica
discs—with curiosity—though he tried to keep up a bit of
superciliousness. At first I was astonished, but very soon I became
awfully curious to see what he would find out from me. I couldn’t
possibly imagine what I had in me to make it worth his while. It was
very pretty to see how he baffled himself, for in truth my body was
full only of chills, and my head had nothing in it but that wretched
steamboat business. It was evident he took me for a perfectly shameless
prevaricator. At last he got angry, and, to conceal a movement of
furious annoyance, he yawned. I rose. Then I noticed a small sketch in
oils, on a panel, representing a woman, draped and blindfolded,
carrying a lighted torch. The background was sombre—almost black. The
movement of the woman was stately, and the effect of the torchlight on
the face was sinister.

“It arrested me, and he stood by civilly, holding an empty half-pint
champagne bottle (medical comforts) with the candle stuck in it. To my
question he said Mr. Kurtz had painted this—in this very station more
than a year ago—while waiting for means to go to his trading post.
‘Tell me, pray,’ said I, ‘who is this Mr. Kurtz?’

“‘The chief of the Inner Station,’ he answered in a short tone, looking
away. ‘Much obliged,’ I said, laughing. ‘And you are the brickmaker of
the Central Station. Every one knows that.’ He was silent for a while.
‘He is a prodigy,’ he said at last. ‘He is an emissary of pity and
science and progress, and devil knows what else. We want,’ he began to
declaim suddenly, ‘for the guidance of the cause intrusted to us by
Europe, so to speak, higher intelligence, wide sympathies, a singleness
of purpose.’ ‘Who says that?’ I asked. ‘Lots of them,’ he replied.
‘Some even write that; and so _he_ comes here, a special being, as you
ought to know.’ ‘Why ought I to know?’ I interrupted, really surprised.
He paid no attention. ‘Yes. Today he is chief of the best station, next
year he will be assistant-manager, two years more and... but I dare-say
you know what he will be in two years’ time. You are of the new
gang—the gang of virtue. The same people who sent him specia