lly also
recommended you. Oh, don’t say no. I’ve my own eyes to trust.’ Light
dawned upon me. My dear aunt’s influential acquaintances were producing
an unexpected effect upon that young man. I nearly burst into a laugh.
‘Do you read the Company’s confidential correspondence?’ I asked. He
hadn’t a word to say. It was great fun. ‘When Mr. Kurtz,’ I continued,
severely, ‘is General Manager, you won’t have the opportunity.’

“He blew the candle out suddenly, and we went outside. The moon had
risen. Black figures strolled about listlessly, pouring water on the
glow, whence proceeded a sound of hissing; steam ascended in the
moonlight, the beaten nigger groaned somewhere. ‘What a row the brute
makes!’ said the indefatigable man with the moustaches, appearing near
us. ‘Serve him right. Transgression—punishment—bang! Pitiless,
pitiless. That’s the only way. This will prevent all conflagrations for
the future. I was just telling the manager...’ He noticed my companion,
and became crestfallen all at once. ‘Not in bed yet,’ he said, with a
kind of servile heartiness; ‘it’s so natural. Ha! Danger—agitation.’ He
vanished. I went on to the riverside, and the other followed me. I
heard a scathing murmur at my ear, ‘Heap of muffs—go to.’ The pilgrims
could be seen in knots gesticulating, discussing. Several had still
their staves in their hands. I verily believe they took these sticks to
bed with them. Beyond the fence the forest stood up spectrally in the
moonlight, and through that dim stir, through the faint sounds of that
lamentable courtyard, the silence of the land went home to one’s very
heart—its mystery, its greatness, the amazing reality of its concealed
life. The hurt nigger moaned feebly somewhere near by, and then fetched
a deep sigh that made me mend my pace away from there. I felt a hand
introducing itself under my arm. ‘My dear sir,’ said the fellow, ‘I
don’t want to be misunderstood, and especially by you, who will see Mr.
Kurtz long before I can have that pleasure. I wouldn’t like him to get
a false idea of my disposition....’

“I let him run on, this _papier-mache_ Mephistopheles, and it seemed to
me that if I tried I could poke my forefinger through him, and would
find nothing inside but a little loose dirt, maybe. He, don’t you see,
had been planning to be assistant-manager by and by under the present
man, and I could see that the coming of that Kurtz had upset them both
not a little. He talked precipitately, and I did not try to stop him. I
had my shoulders against the wreck of my steamer, hauled up on the
slope like a carcass of some big river animal. The smell of mud, of
primeval mud, by Jove! was in my nostrils, the high stillness of
primeval forest was before my eyes; there were shiny patches on the
black creek. The moon had spread over everything a thin layer of
silver—over the rank grass, over the mud, upon the wall of matted
vegetation standing higher than the wall of a temple, over the great
river I could see through a sombre gap glittering, glittering, as it
flowed broadly by without a murmur. All this was great, expectant,
mute, while the man jabbered about himself. I wondered whether the
stillness on the face of the immensity looking at us two were meant as
an appeal or as a menace. What were we who had strayed in here? Could
we handle that dumb thing, or would it handle us? I felt how big, how
confoundedly big, was that thing that couldn’t talk, and perhaps was
deaf as well. What was in there? I could see a little ivory coming out
from there, and I had heard Mr. Kurtz was in there. I had heard enough
about it, too—God knows! Yet somehow it didn’t bring any image with
it—no more than if I had been told an angel or a fiend was in there. I
believed it in the same way one of you might believe there are
inhabitants in the planet Mars. I knew once a Scotch sailmaker who was
certain, dead sure, there were people in Mars. If you asked him for
some idea how 