deadly—like a snake.
Ough! A door opened, a white-haired secretarial head, but wearing a
compassionate expression, appeared, and a skinny forefinger beckoned me
into the sanctuary. Its light was dim, and a heavy writing-desk
squatted in the middle. From behind that structure came out an
impression of pale plumpness in a frock-coat. The great man himself. He
was five feet six, I should judge, and had his grip on the handle-end
of ever so many millions. He shook hands, I fancy, murmured vaguely,
was satisfied with my French. _Bon Voyage_.

“In about forty-five seconds I found myself again in the waiting-room
with the compassionate secretary, who, full of desolation and sympathy,
made me sign some document. I believe I undertook amongst other things
not to disclose any trade secrets. Well, I am not going to.

“I began to feel slightly uneasy. You know I am not used to such
ceremonies, and there was something ominous in the atmosphere. It was
just as though I had been let into some conspiracy—I don’t
know—something not quite right; and I was glad to get out. In the outer
room the two women knitted black wool feverishly. People were arriving,
and the younger one was walking back and forth introducing them. The
old one sat on her chair. Her flat cloth slippers were propped up on a
foot-warmer, and a cat reposed on her lap. She wore a starched white
affair on her head, had a wart on one cheek, and silver-rimmed
spectacles hung on the tip of her nose. She glanced at me above the
glasses. The swift and indifferent placidity of that look troubled me.
Two youths with foolish and cheery countenances were being piloted
over, and she threw at them the same quick glance of unconcerned
wisdom. She seemed to know all about them and about me, too. An eerie
feeling came over me. She seemed uncanny and fateful. Often far away
there I thought of these two, guarding the door of Darkness, knitting
black wool as for a warm pall, one introducing, introducing
continuously to the unknown, the other scrutinizing the cheery and
foolish faces with unconcerned old eyes. _Ave!_ Old knitter of black
wool. _Morituri te salutant_. Not many of those she looked at ever saw
her again—not half, by a long way.

“There was yet a visit to the doctor. ‘A simple formality,’ assured me
the secretary, with an air of taking an immense part in all my sorrows.
Accordingly a young chap wearing his hat over the left eyebrow, some
clerk I suppose—there must have been clerks in the business, though the
house was as still as a house in a city of the dead—came from somewhere
up-stairs, and led me forth. He was shabby and careless, with inkstains
on the sleeves of his jacket, and his cravat was large and billowy,
under a chin shaped like the toe of an old boot. It was a little too
early for the doctor, so I proposed a drink, and thereupon he developed
a vein of joviality. As we sat over our vermouths he glorified the
Company’s business, and by and by I expressed casually my surprise at
him not going out there. He became very cool and collected all at once.
‘I am not such a fool as I look, quoth Plato to his disciples,’ he said
sententiously, emptied his glass with great resolution, and we rose.

“The old doctor felt my pulse, evidently thinking of something else the
while. ‘Good, good for there,’ he mumbled, and then with a certain
eagerness asked me whether I would let him measure my head. Rather
surprised, I said Yes, when he produced a thing like calipers and got
the dimensions back and front and every way, taking notes carefully. He
was an unshaven little man in a threadbare coat like a gaberdine, with
his feet in slippers, and I thought him a harmless fool. ‘I always ask
leave, in the interests of science, to measure the crania of those
going out there,’ he said. ‘And when they come back, too?’ I asked.
‘Oh, I never see them,’ he remarked; ‘and, moreover, the changes take
place inside, you know.’ He smiled, as if at