 fall on one as
trenchant and heavy as an axe. But even at these times the rest of his
person seemed to disclaim the intention. Otherwise there was only an
indefinable, faint expression of his lips, something stealthy—a
smile—not a smile—I remember it, but I can’t explain. It was
unconscious, this smile was, though just after he had said something it
got intensified for an instant. It came at the end of his speeches like
a seal applied on the words to make the meaning of the commonest phrase
appear absolutely inscrutable. He was a common trader, from his youth
up employed in these parts—nothing more. He was obeyed, yet he inspired
neither love nor fear, nor even respect. He inspired uneasiness. That
was it! Uneasiness. Not a definite mistrust—just uneasiness—nothing
more. You have no idea how effective such a... a... faculty can be. He
had no genius for organizing, for initiative, or for order even. That
was evident in such things as the deplorable state of the station. He
had no learning, and no intelligence. His position had come to him—why?
Perhaps because he was never ill... He had served three terms of three
years out there... Because triumphant health in the general rout of
constitutions is a kind of power in itself. When he went home on leave
he rioted on a large scale—pompously. Jack ashore—with a difference—in
externals only. This one could gather from his casual talk. He
originated nothing, he could keep the routine going—that’s all. But he
was great. He was great by this little thing that it was impossible to
tell what could control such a man. He never gave that secret away.
Perhaps there was nothing within him. Such a suspicion made one
pause—for out there there were no external checks. Once when various
tropical diseases had laid low almost every ‘agent’ in the station, he
was heard to say, ‘Men who come out here should have no entrails.’ He
sealed the utterance with that smile of his, as though it had been a
door opening into a darkness he had in his keeping. You fancied you had
seen things—but the seal was on. When annoyed at meal-times by the
constant quarrels of the white men about precedence, he ordered an
immense round table to be made, for which a special house had to be
built. This was the station’s mess-room. Where he sat was the first
place—the rest were nowhere. One felt this to be his unalterable
conviction. He was neither civil nor uncivil. He was quiet. He allowed
his ‘boy’—an overfed young negro from the coast—to treat the white men,
under his very eyes, with provoking insolence.

“He began to speak as soon as he saw me. I had been very long on the
road. He could not wait. Had to start without me. The up-river stations
had to be relieved. There had been so many delays already that he did
not know who was dead and who was alive, and how they got on—and so on,
and so on. He paid no attention to my explanations, and, playing with a
stick of sealing-wax, repeated several times that the situation was
‘very grave, very grave.’ There were rumours that a very important
station was in jeopardy, and its chief, Mr. Kurtz, was ill. Hoped it
was not true. Mr. Kurtz was... I felt weary and irritable. Hang Kurtz,
I thought. I interrupted him by saying I had heard of Mr. Kurtz on the
coast. ‘Ah! So they talk of him down there,’ he murmured to himself.
Then he began again, assuring me Mr. Kurtz was the best agent he had,
an exceptional man, of the greatest importance to the Company;
therefore I could understand his anxiety. He was, he said, ‘very, very
uneasy.’ Certainly he fidgeted on his chair a good deal, exclaimed,
‘Ah, Mr. Kurtz!’ broke the stick of sealing-wax and seemed dumfounded
by the accident. Next thing he wanted to know ‘how long it would take
to’... I interrupted him again. Being hungry, you know, and kept on my
feet too. I was getting savage. ‘How can I tell?’ I said. ‘I haven’t
even seen the wreck yet—some months, no doubt.’ All this talk see