sense of commonplace, deadly danger, the possibility of a sudden
onslaught and massacre, or something of the kind, which I saw
impending, was positively welcome and composing. It pacified me, in
fact, so much that I did not raise an alarm.

“There was an agent buttoned up inside an ulster and sleeping on a
chair on deck within three feet of me. The yells had not awakened him;
he snored very slightly; I left him to his slumbers and leaped ashore.
I did not betray Mr. Kurtz—it was ordered I should never betray him—it
was written I should be loyal to the nightmare of my choice. I was
anxious to deal with this shadow by myself alone—and to this day I
don’t know why I was so jealous of sharing with any one the peculiar
blackness of that experience.

“As soon as I got on the bank I saw a trail—a broad trail through the
grass. I remember the exultation with which I said to myself, ‘He can’t
walk—he is crawling on all-fours—I’ve got him.’ The grass was wet with
dew. I strode rapidly with clenched fists. I fancy I had some vague
notion of falling upon him and giving him a drubbing. I don’t know. I
had some imbecile thoughts. The knitting old woman with the cat
obtruded herself upon my memory as a most improper person to be sitting
at the other end of such an affair. I saw a row of pilgrims squirting
lead in the air out of Winchesters held to the hip. I thought I would
never get back to the steamer, and imagined myself living alone and
unarmed in the woods to an advanced age. Such silly things—you know.
And I remember I confounded the beat of the drum with the beating of my
heart, and was pleased at its calm regularity.

“I kept to the track though—then stopped to listen. The night was very
clear; a dark blue space, sparkling with dew and starlight, in which
black things stood very still. I thought I could see a kind of motion
ahead of me. I was strangely cocksure of everything that night. I
actually left the track and ran in a wide semicircle (I verily believe
chuckling to myself) so as to get in front of that stir, of that motion
I had seen—if indeed I had seen anything. I was circumventing Kurtz as
though it had been a boyish game.

“I came upon him, and, if he had not heard me coming, I would have
fallen over him, too, but he got up in time. He rose, unsteady, long,
pale, indistinct, like a vapour exhaled by the earth, and swayed
slightly, misty and silent before me; while at my back the fires loomed
between the trees, and the murmur of many voices issued from the
forest. I had cut him off cleverly; but when actually confronting him I
seemed to come to my senses, I saw the danger in its right proportion.
It was by no means over yet. Suppose he began to shout? Though he could
hardly stand, there was still plenty of vigour in his voice. ‘Go
away—hide yourself,’ he said, in that profound tone. It was very awful.
I glanced back. We were within thirty yards from the nearest fire. A
black figure stood up, strode on long black legs, waving long black
arms, across the glow. It had horns—antelope horns, I think—on its
head. Some sorcerer, some witch-man, no doubt: it looked fiendlike
enough. ‘Do you know what you are doing?’ I whispered. ‘Perfectly,’ he
answered, raising his voice for that single word: it sounded to me far
off and yet loud, like a hail through a speaking-trumpet. ‘If he makes
a row we are lost,’ I thought to myself. This clearly was not a case
for fisticuffs, even apart from the very natural aversion I had to beat
that Shadow—this wandering and tormented thing. ‘You will be lost,’ I
said—‘utterly lost.’ One gets sometimes such a flash of inspiration,
you know. I did say the right thing, though indeed he could not have
been more irretrievably lost than he was at this very moment, when the
foundations of our intimacy were being laid—to endure—to endure—even to
the end—even beyond.

“‘I had immense plans,’ he muttered irresolutely. ‘Yes,’ said I; ‘but
if you try to