owning, inviting, grand, mean, insipid, or
savage, and always mute with an air of whispering, ‘Come and find out.’
This one was almost featureless, as if still in the making, with an
aspect of monotonous grimness. The edge of a colossal jungle, so
dark-green as to be almost black, fringed with white surf, ran
straight, like a ruled line, far, far away along a blue sea whose
glitter was blurred by a creeping mist. The sun was fierce, the land
seemed to glisten and drip with steam. Here and there greyish-whitish
specks showed up clustered inside the white surf, with a flag flying
above them perhaps. Settlements some centuries old, and still no bigger
than pinheads on the untouched expanse of their background. We pounded
along, stopped, landed soldiers; went on, landed custom-house clerks to
levy toll in what looked like a God-forsaken wilderness, with a tin
shed and a flag-pole lost in it; landed more soldiers—to take care of
the custom-house clerks, presumably. Some, I heard, got drowned in the
surf; but whether they did or not, nobody seemed particularly to care.
They were just flung out there, and on we went. Every day the coast
looked the same, as though we had not moved; but we passed various
places—trading places—with names like Gran’ Bassam, Little Popo; names
that seemed to belong to some sordid farce acted in front of a sinister
back-cloth. The idleness of a passenger, my isolation amongst all these
men with whom I had no point of contact, the oily and languid sea, the
uniform sombreness of the coast, seemed to keep me away from the truth
of things, within the toil of a mournful and senseless delusion. The
voice of the surf heard now and then was a positive pleasure, like the
speech of a brother. It was something natural, that had its reason,
that had a meaning. Now and then a boat from the shore gave one a
momentary contact with reality. It was paddled by black fellows. You
could see from afar the white of their eyeballs glistening. They
shouted, sang; their bodies streamed with perspiration; they had faces
like grotesque masks—these chaps; but they had bone, muscle, a wild
vitality, an intense energy of movement, that was as natural and true
as the surf along their coast. They wanted no excuse for being there.
They were a great comfort to look at. For a time I would feel I
belonged still to a world of straightforward facts; but the feeling
would not last long. Something would turn up to scare it away. Once, I
remember, we came upon a man-of-war anchored off the coast. There
wasn’t even a shed there, and she was shelling the bush. It appears the
French had one of their wars going on thereabouts. Her ensign dropped
limp like a rag; the muzzles of the long six-inch guns stuck out all
over the low hull; the greasy, slimy swell swung her up lazily and let
her down, swaying her thin masts. In the empty immensity of earth, sky,
and water, there she was, incomprehensible, firing into a continent.
Pop, would go one of the six-inch guns; a small flame would dart and
vanish, a little white smoke would disappear, a tiny projectile would
give a feeble screech—and nothing happened. Nothing could happen. There
was a touch of insanity in the proceeding, a sense of lugubrious
drollery in the sight; and it was not dissipated by somebody on board
assuring me earnestly there was a camp of natives—he called them
enemies!—hidden out of sight somewhere.

“We gave her her letters (I heard the men in that lonely ship were
dying of fever at the rate of three a day) and went on. We called at
some more places with farcical names, where the merry dance of death
and trade goes on in a still and earthy atmosphere as of an overheated
catacomb; all along the formless coast bordered by dangerous surf, as
if Nature herself had tried to ward off intruders; in and out of
rivers, streams of death in life, whose banks were rotting into mud,
whose waters, thickened into slime, invaded the contorted m