melled feet may
take him into by the way of solitude—utter solitude without a
policeman—by the way of silence—utter silence, where no warning voice
of a kind neighbour can be heard whispering of public opinion? These
little things make all the great difference. When they are gone you
must fall back upon your own innate strength, upon your own capacity
for faithfulness. Of course you may be too much of a fool to go
wrong—too dull even to know you are being assaulted by the powers of
darkness. I take it, no fool ever made a bargain for his soul with the
devil; the fool is too much of a fool, or the devil too much of a
devil—I don’t know which. Or you may be such a thunderingly exalted
creature as to be altogether deaf and blind to anything but heavenly
sights and sounds. Then the earth for you is only a standing place—and
whether to be like this is your loss or your gain I won’t pretend to
say. But most of us are neither one nor the other. The earth for us is
a place to live in, where we must put up with sights, with sounds, with
smells, too, by Jove!—breathe dead hippo, so to speak, and not be
contaminated. And there, don’t you see? Your strength comes in, the
faith in your ability for the digging of unostentatious holes to bury
the stuff in—your power of devotion, not to yourself, but to an
obscure, back-breaking business. And that’s difficult enough. Mind, I
am not trying to excuse or even explain—I am trying to account to
myself for—for—Mr. Kurtz—for the shade of Mr. Kurtz. This initiated
wraith from the back of Nowhere honoured me with its amazing confidence
before it vanished altogether. This was because it could speak English
to me. The original Kurtz had been educated partly in England, and—as
he was good enough to say himself—his sympathies were in the right
place. His mother was half-English, his father was half-French. All
Europe contributed to the making of Kurtz; and by and by I learned
that, most appropriately, the International Society for the Suppression
of Savage Customs had intrusted him with the making of a report, for
its future guidance. And he had written it, too. I’ve seen it. I’ve
read it. It was eloquent, vibrating with eloquence, but too
high-strung, I think. Seventeen pages of close writing he had found
time for! But this must have been before his—let us say—nerves, went
wrong, and caused him to preside at certain midnight dances ending with
unspeakable rites, which—as far as I reluctantly gathered from what I
heard at various times—were offered up to him—do you understand?—to Mr.
Kurtz himself. But it was a beautiful piece of writing. The opening
paragraph, however, in the light of later information, strikes me now
as ominous. He began with the argument that we whites, from the point
of development we had arrived at, ‘must necessarily appear to them
[savages] in the nature of supernatural beings—we approach them with
the might of a deity,’ and so on, and so on. ‘By the simple exercise of
our will we can exert a power for good practically unbounded,’ etc.,
etc. From that point he soared and took me with him. The peroration was
magnificent, though difficult to remember, you know. It gave me the
notion of an exotic Immensity ruled by an august Benevolence. It made
me tingle with enthusiasm. This was the unbounded power of eloquence—of
words—of burning noble words. There were no practical hints to
interrupt the magic current of phrases, unless a kind of note at the
foot of the last page, scrawled evidently much later, in an unsteady
hand, may be regarded as the exposition of a method. It was very
simple, and at the end of that moving appeal to every altruistic
sentiment it blazed at you, luminous and terrifying, like a flash of
lightning in a serene sky: ‘Exterminate all the brutes!’ The curious
part was that he had apparently forgotten all about that valuable
postscriptum, because, later on, when he in a sense came to himself, he
repeatedly entrea