. ‘Good for you!’ he cried, snapped his fingers
above his head, lifting one foot. I tried a jig. We capered on the iron
deck. A frightful clatter came out of that hulk, and the virgin forest
on the other bank of the creek sent it back in a thundering roll upon
the sleeping station. It must have made some of the pilgrims sit up in
their hovels. A dark figure obscured the lighted doorway of the
manager’s hut, vanished, then, a second or so after, the doorway itself
vanished, too. We stopped, and the silence driven away by the stamping
of our feet flowed back again from the recesses of the land. The great
wall of vegetation, an exuberant and entangled mass of trunks,
branches, leaves, boughs, festoons, motionless in the moonlight, was
like a rioting invasion of soundless life, a rolling wave of plants,
piled up, crested, ready to topple over the creek, to sweep every
little man of us out of his little existence. And it moved not. A
deadened burst of mighty splashes and snorts reached us from afar, as
though an icthyosaurus had been taking a bath of glitter in the great
river. ‘After all,’ said the boiler-maker in a reasonable tone, ‘why
shouldn’t we get the rivets?’ Why not, indeed! I did not know of any
reason why we shouldn’t. ‘They’ll come in three weeks,’ I said
confidently.

“But they didn’t. Instead of rivets there came an invasion, an
infliction, a visitation. It came in sections during the next three
weeks, each section headed by a donkey carrying a white man in new
clothes and tan shoes, bowing from that elevation right and left to the
impressed pilgrims. A quarrelsome band of footsore sulky niggers trod
on the heels of the donkey; a lot of tents, camp-stools, tin boxes,
white cases, brown bales would be shot down in the courtyard, and the
air of mystery would deepen a little over the muddle of the station.
Five such instalments came, with their absurd air of disorderly flight
with the loot of innumerable outfit shops and provision stores, that,
one would think, they were lugging, after a raid, into the wilderness
for equitable division. It was an inextricable mess of things decent in
themselves but that human folly made look like the spoils of thieving.

“This devoted band called itself the Eldorado Exploring Expedition, and
I believe they were sworn to secrecy. Their talk, however, was the talk
of sordid buccaneers: it was reckless without hardihood, greedy without
audacity, and cruel without courage; there was not an atom of foresight
or of serious intention in the whole batch of them, and they did not
seem aware these things are wanted for the work of the world. To tear
treasure out of the bowels of the land was their desire, with no more
moral purpose at the back of it than there is in burglars breaking into
a safe. Who paid the expenses of the noble enterprise I don’t know; but
the uncle of our manager was leader of that lot.

“In exterior he resembled a butcher in a poor neighbourhood, and his
eyes had a look of sleepy cunning. He carried his fat paunch with
ostentation on his short legs, and during the time his gang infested
the station spoke to no one but his nephew. You could see these two
roaming about all day long with their heads close together in an
everlasting confab.

“I had given up worrying myself about the rivets. One’s capacity for
that kind of folly is more limited than you would suppose. I said
Hang!—and let things slide. I had plenty of time for meditation, and
now and then I would give some thought to Kurtz. I wasn’t very
interested in him. No. Still, I was curious to see whether this man,
who had come out equipped with moral ideas of some sort, would climb to
the top after all and how he would set about his work when there.”




II


“One evening as I was lying flat on the deck of my steamboat, I heard
voices approaching—and there were the nephew and the uncle strolling
along the bank. I laid my head on my arm again, and had nea