 some quiet joke. ‘So you
are going out there. Famous. Interesting, too.’ He gave me a searching
glance, and made another note. ‘Ever any madness in your family?’ he
asked, in a matter-of-fact tone. I felt very annoyed. ‘Is that question
in the interests of science, too?’ ‘It would be,’ he said, without
taking notice of my irritation, ‘interesting for science to watch the
mental changes of individuals, on the spot, but...’ ‘Are you an
alienist?’ I interrupted. ‘Every doctor should be—a little,’ answered
that original, imperturbably. ‘I have a little theory which you
messieurs who go out there must help me to prove. This is my share in
the advantages my country shall reap from the possession of such a
magnificent dependency. The mere wealth I leave to others. Pardon my
questions, but you are the first Englishman coming under my
observation...’ I hastened to assure him I was not in the least
typical. ‘If I were,’ said I, ‘I wouldn’t be talking like this with
you.’ ‘What you say is rather profound, and probably erroneous,’ he
said, with a laugh. ‘Avoid irritation more than exposure to the sun.
_Adieu_. How do you English say, eh? Good-bye. Ah! Good-bye. _Adieu_.
In the tropics one must before everything keep calm.’... He lifted a
warning forefinger.... ‘_Du calme, du calme_.’

“One thing more remained to do—say good-bye to my excellent aunt. I
found her triumphant. I had a cup of tea—the last decent cup of tea for
many days—and in a room that most soothingly looked just as you would
expect a lady’s drawing-room to look, we had a long quiet chat by the
fireside. In the course of these confidences it became quite plain to
me I had been represented to the wife of the high dignitary, and
goodness knows to how many more people besides, as an exceptional and
gifted creature—a piece of good fortune for the Company—a man you don’t
get hold of every day. Good heavens! and I was going to take charge of
a two-penny-half-penny river-steamboat with a penny whistle attached!
It appeared, however, I was also one of the Workers, with a capital—you
know. Something like an emissary of light, something like a lower sort
of apostle. There had been a lot of such rot let loose in print and
talk just about that time, and the excellent woman, living right in the
rush of all that humbug, got carried off her feet. She talked about
‘weaning those ignorant millions from their horrid ways,’ till, upon my
word, she made me quite uncomfortable. I ventured to hint that the
Company was run for profit.

“‘You forget, dear Charlie, that the labourer is worthy of his hire,’
she said, brightly. It’s queer how out of touch with truth women are.
They live in a world of their own, and there has never been anything
like it, and never can be. It is too beautiful altogether, and if they
were to set it up it would go to pieces before the first sunset. Some
confounded fact we men have been living contentedly with ever since the
day of creation would start up and knock the whole thing over.

“After this I got embraced, told to wear flannel, be sure to write
often, and so on—and I left. In the street—I don’t know why—a queer
feeling came to me that I was an imposter. Odd thing that I, who used
to clear out for any part of the world at twenty-four hours’ notice,
with less thought than most men give to the crossing of a street, had a
moment—I won’t say of hesitation, but of startled pause, before this
commonplace affair. The best way I can explain it to you is by saying
that, for a second or two, I felt as though, instead of going to the
centre of a continent, I were about to set off for the centre of the
earth.

“I left in a French steamer, and she called in every blamed port they
have out there, for, as far as I could see, the sole purpose of landing
soldiers and custom-house officers. I watched the coast. Watching a
coast as it slips by the ship is like thinking about an enigma. There
it is before you—smiling, fr