t screech after screech
hurriedly. The tumult of angry and warlike yells was checked instantly,
and then from the depths of the woods went out such a tremulous and
prolonged wail of mournful fear and utter despair as may be imagined to
follow the flight of the last hope from the earth. There was a great
commotion in the bush; the shower of arrows stopped, a few dropping
shots rang out sharply—then silence, in which the languid beat of the
stern-wheel came plainly to my ears. I put the helm hard a-starboard at
the moment when the pilgrim in pink pyjamas, very hot and agitated,
appeared in the doorway. ‘The manager sends me—’ he began in an
official tone, and stopped short. ‘Good God!’ he said, glaring at the
wounded man.

“We two whites stood over him, and his lustrous and inquiring glance
enveloped us both. I declare it looked as though he would presently put
to us some questions in an understandable language; but he died without
uttering a sound, without moving a limb, without twitching a muscle.
Only in the very last moment, as though in response to some sign we
could not see, to some whisper we could not hear, he frowned heavily,
and that frown gave to his black death-mask an inconceivably sombre,
brooding, and menacing expression. The lustre of inquiring glance faded
swiftly into vacant glassiness. ‘Can you steer?’ I asked the agent
eagerly. He looked very dubious; but I made a grab at his arm, and he
understood at once I meant him to steer whether or no. To tell you the
truth, I was morbidly anxious to change my shoes and socks. ‘He is
dead,’ murmured the fellow, immensely impressed. ‘No doubt about it,’
said I, tugging like mad at the shoe-laces. ‘And by the way, I suppose
Mr. Kurtz is dead as well by this time.’

“For the moment that was the dominant thought. There was a sense of
extreme disappointment, as though I had found out I had been striving
after something altogether without a substance. I couldn’t have been
more disgusted if I had travelled all this way for the sole purpose of
talking with Mr. Kurtz. Talking with... I flung one shoe overboard, and
became aware that that was exactly what I had been looking forward to—a
talk with Kurtz. I made the strange discovery that I had never imagined
him as doing, you know, but as discoursing. I didn’t say to myself,
‘Now I will never see him,’ or ‘Now I will never shake him by the
hand,’ but, ‘Now I will never hear him.’ The man presented himself as a
voice. Not of course that I did not connect him with some sort of
action. Hadn’t I been told in all the tones of jealousy and admiration
that he had collected, bartered, swindled, or stolen more ivory than
all the other agents together? That was not the point. The point was in
his being a gifted creature, and that of all his gifts the one that
stood out preeminently, that carried with it a sense of real presence,
was his ability to talk, his words—the gift of expression, the
bewildering, the illuminating, the most exalted and the most
contemptible, the pulsating stream of light, or the deceitful flow from
the heart of an impenetrable darkness.

“The other shoe went flying unto the devil-god of that river. I
thought, ‘By Jove! it’s all over. We are too late; he has vanished—the
gift has vanished, by means of some spear, arrow, or club. I will never
hear that chap speak after all’—and my sorrow had a startling
extravagance of emotion, even such as I had noticed in the howling
sorrow of these savages in the bush. I couldn’t have felt more of
lonely desolation somehow, had I been robbed of a belief or had missed
my destiny in life.... Why do you sigh in this beastly way, somebody?
Absurd? Well, absurd. Good Lord! mustn’t a man ever—Here, give me some
tobacco.”...

There was a pause of profound stillness, then a match flared, and
Marlow’s lean face appeared, worn, hollow, with downward folds and
dropped eyelids, with an aspect of concentrated attention; and as he
too