of plants, and water, and
silence. And this stillness of life did not in the least resemble a
peace. It was the stillness of an implacable force brooding over an
inscrutable intention. It looked at you with a vengeful aspect. I got
used to it afterwards; I did not see it any more; I had no time. I had
to keep guessing at the channel; I had to discern, mostly by
inspiration, the signs of hidden banks; I watched for sunken stones; I
was learning to clap my teeth smartly before my heart flew out, when I
shaved by a fluke some infernal sly old snag that would have ripped the
life out of the tin-pot steamboat and drowned all the pilgrims; I had
to keep a lookout for the signs of dead wood we could cut up in the
night for next day’s steaming. When you have to attend to things of
that sort, to the mere incidents of the surface, the reality—the
reality, I tell you—fades. The inner truth is hidden—luckily, luckily.
But I felt it all the same; I felt often its mysterious stillness
watching me at my monkey tricks, just as it watches you fellows
performing on your respective tight-ropes for—what is it? half-a-crown
a tumble—”

“Try to be civil, Marlow,” growled a voice, and I knew there was at
least one listener awake besides myself.

“I beg your pardon. I forgot the heartache which makes up the rest of
the price. And indeed what does the price matter, if the trick be well
done? You do your tricks very well. And I didn’t do badly either, since
I managed not to sink that steamboat on my first trip. It’s a wonder to
me yet. Imagine a blindfolded man set to drive a van over a bad road. I
sweated and shivered over that business considerably, I can tell you.
After all, for a seaman, to scrape the bottom of the thing that’s
supposed to float all the time under his care is the unpardonable sin.
No one may know of it, but you never forget the thump—eh? A blow on the
very heart. You remember it, you dream of it, you wake up at night and
think of it—years after—and go hot and cold all over. I don’t pretend
to say that steamboat floated all the time. More than once she had to
wade for a bit, with twenty cannibals splashing around and pushing. We
had enlisted some of these chaps on the way for a crew. Fine
fellows—cannibals—in their place. They were men one could work with,
and I am grateful to them. And, after all, they did not eat each other
before my face: they had brought along a provision of hippo-meat which
went rotten, and made the mystery of the wilderness stink in my
nostrils. Phoo! I can sniff it now. I had the manager on board and
three or four pilgrims with their staves—all complete. Sometimes we
came upon a station close by the bank, clinging to the skirts of the
unknown, and the white men rushing out of a tumble-down hovel, with
great gestures of joy and surprise and welcome, seemed very strange—had
the appearance of being held there captive by a spell. The word ivory
would ring in the air for a while—and on we went again into the
silence, along empty reaches, round the still bends, between the high
walls of our winding way, reverberating in hollow claps the ponderous
beat of the stern-wheel. Trees, trees, millions of trees, massive,
immense, running up high; and at their foot, hugging the bank against
the stream, crept the little begrimed steamboat, like a sluggish beetle
crawling on the floor of a lofty portico. It made you feel very small,
very lost, and yet it was not altogether depressing, that feeling.
After all, if you were small, the grimy beetle crawled on—which was
just what you wanted it to do. Where the pilgrims imagined it crawled
to I don’t know. To some place where they expected to get something. I
bet! For me it crawled towards Kurtz—exclusively; but when the
steam-pipes started leaking we crawled very slow. The reaches opened
before us and closed behind, as if the forest had stepped leisurely
across the water to bar the way for our return. We penetrated deeper