with as profound a meaning
as the sound of bells in a Christian country. Once a white man in an
unbuttoned uniform, camping on the path with an armed escort of lank
Zanzibaris, very hospitable and festive—not to say drunk. Was looking
after the upkeep of the road, he declared. Can’t say I saw any road or
any upkeep, unless the body of a middle-aged negro, with a bullet-hole
in the forehead, upon which I absolutely stumbled three miles farther
on, may be considered as a permanent improvement. I had a white
companion, too, not a bad chap, but rather too fleshy and with the
exasperating habit of fainting on the hot hillsides, miles away from
the least bit of shade and water. Annoying, you know, to hold your own
coat like a parasol over a man’s head while he is coming to. I couldn’t
help asking him once what he meant by coming there at all. ‘To make
money, of course. What do you think?’ he said, scornfully. Then he got
fever, and had to be carried in a hammock slung under a pole. As he
weighed sixteen stone I had no end of rows with the carriers. They
jibbed, ran away, sneaked off with their loads in the night—quite a
mutiny. So, one evening, I made a speech in English with gestures, not
one of which was lost to the sixty pairs of eyes before me, and the
next morning I started the hammock off in front all right. An hour
afterwards I came upon the whole concern wrecked in a bush—man,
hammock, groans, blankets, horrors. The heavy pole had skinned his poor
nose. He was very anxious for me to kill somebody, but there wasn’t the
shadow of a carrier near. I remembered the old doctor—‘It would be
interesting for science to watch the mental changes of individuals, on
the spot.’ I felt I was becoming scientifically interesting. However,
all that is to no purpose. On the fifteenth day I came in sight of the
big river again, and hobbled into the Central Station. It was on a back
water surrounded by scrub and forest, with a pretty border of smelly
mud on one side, and on the three others enclosed by a crazy fence of
rushes. A neglected gap was all the gate it had, and the first glance
at the place was enough to let you see the flabby devil was running
that show. White men with long staves in their hands appeared languidly
from amongst the buildings, strolling up to take a look at me, and then
retired out of sight somewhere. One of them, a stout, excitable chap
with black moustaches, informed me with great volubility and many
digressions, as soon as I told him who I was, that my steamer was at
the bottom of the river. I was thunderstruck. What, how, why? Oh, it
was ‘all right.’ The ‘manager himself’ was there. All quite correct.
‘Everybody had behaved splendidly! splendidly!’—‘you must,’ he said in
agitation, ‘go and see the general manager at once. He is waiting!’

“I did not see the real significance of that wreck at once. I fancy I
see it now, but I am not sure—not at all. Certainly the affair was too
stupid—when I think of it—to be altogether natural. Still... But at the
moment it presented itself simply as a confounded nuisance. The steamer
was sunk. They had started two days before in a sudden hurry up the
river with the manager on board, in charge of some volunteer skipper,
and before they had been out three hours they tore the bottom out of
her on stones, and she sank near the south bank. I asked myself what I
was to do there, now my boat was lost. As a matter of fact, I had
plenty to do in fishing my command out of the river. I had to set about
it the very next day. That, and the repairs when I brought the pieces
to the station, took some months.

“My first interview with the manager was curious. He did not ask me to
sit down after my twenty-mile walk that morning. He was commonplace in
complexion, in features, in manners, and in voice. He was of middle
size and of ordinary build. His eyes, of the usual blue, were perhaps
remarkably cold, and he certainly could make his glance