xious to go. It was only months and months afterwards,
when I made the attempt to recover what was left of the body, that I
heard the original quarrel arose from a misunderstanding about some
hens. Yes, two black hens. Fresleven—that was the fellow’s name, a
Dane—thought himself wronged somehow in the bargain, so he went ashore
and started to hammer the chief of the village with a stick. Oh, it
didn’t surprise me in the least to hear this, and at the same time to
be told that Fresleven was the gentlest, quietest creature that ever
walked on two legs. No doubt he was; but he had been a couple of years
already out there engaged in the noble cause, you know, and he probably
felt the need at last of asserting his self-respect in some way.
Therefore he whacked the old nigger mercilessly, while a big crowd of
his people watched him, thunderstruck, till some man—I was told the
chief’s son—in desperation at hearing the old chap yell, made a
tentative jab with a spear at the white man—and of course it went quite
easy between the shoulder-blades. Then the whole population cleared
into the forest, expecting all kinds of calamities to happen, while, on
the other hand, the steamer Fresleven commanded left also in a bad
panic, in charge of the engineer, I believe. Afterwards nobody seemed
to trouble much about Fresleven’s remains, till I got out and stepped
into his shoes. I couldn’t let it rest, though; but when an opportunity
offered at last to meet my predecessor, the grass growing through his
ribs was tall enough to hide his bones. They were all there. The
supernatural being had not been touched after he fell. And the village
was deserted, the huts gaped black, rotting, all askew within the
fallen enclosures. A calamity had come to it, sure enough. The people
had vanished. Mad terror had scattered them, men, women, and children,
through the bush, and they had never returned. What became of the hens
I don’t know either. I should think the cause of progress got them,
anyhow. However, through this glorious affair I got my appointment,
before I had fairly begun to hope for it.

“I flew around like mad to get ready, and before forty-eight hours I
was crossing the Channel to show myself to my employers, and sign the
contract. In a very few hours I arrived in a city that always makes me
think of a whited sepulchre. Prejudice no doubt. I had no difficulty in
finding the Company’s offices. It was the biggest thing in the town,
and everybody I met was full of it. They were going to run an over-sea
empire, and make no end of coin by trade.

“A narrow and deserted street in deep shadow, high houses, innumerable
windows with venetian blinds, a dead silence, grass sprouting between
the stones, imposing carriage archways right and left, immense double
doors standing ponderously ajar. I slipped through one of these cracks,
went up a swept and ungarnished staircase, as arid as a desert, and
opened the first door I came to. Two women, one fat and the other slim,
sat on straw-bottomed chairs, knitting black wool. The slim one got up
and walked straight at me—still knitting with downcast eyes—and only
just as I began to think of getting out of her way, as you would for a
somnambulist, stood still, and looked up. Her dress was as plain as an
umbrella-cover, and she turned round without a word and preceded me
into a waiting-room. I gave my name, and looked about. Deal table in
the middle, plain chairs all round the walls, on one end a large
shining map, marked with all the colours of a rainbow. There was a vast
amount of red—good to see at any time, because one knows that some real
work is done in there, a deuce of a lot of blue, a little green, smears
of orange, and, on the East Coast, a purple patch, to show where the
jolly pioneers of progress drink the jolly lager-beer. However, I
wasn’t going into any of these. I was going into the yellow. Dead in
the centre. And the river was there—fascinating—