ed to remain—why he did not instantly
disappear. ‘I went a little farther,’ he said, ‘then still a little
farther—till I had gone so far that I don’t know how I’ll ever get
back. Never mind. Plenty time. I can manage. You take Kurtz away
quick—quick—I tell you.’ The glamour of youth enveloped his
parti-coloured rags, his destitution, his loneliness, the essential
desolation of his futile wanderings. For months—for years—his life
hadn’t been worth a day’s purchase; and there he was gallantly,
thoughtlessly alive, to all appearances indestructible solely by the
virtue of his few years and of his unreflecting audacity. I was seduced
into something like admiration—like envy. Glamour urged him on, glamour
kept him unscathed. He surely wanted nothing from the wilderness but
space to breathe in and to push on through. His need was to exist, and
to move onwards at the greatest possible risk, and with a maximum of
privation. If the absolutely pure, uncalculating, unpractical spirit of
adventure had ever ruled a human being, it ruled this bepatched youth.
I almost envied him the possession of this modest and clear flame. It
seemed to have consumed all thought of self so completely, that even
while he was talking to you, you forgot that it was he—the man before
your eyes—who had gone through these things. I did not envy him his
devotion to Kurtz, though. He had not meditated over it. It came to
him, and he accepted it with a sort of eager fatalism. I must say that
to me it appeared about the most dangerous thing in every way he had
come upon so far.

“They had come together unavoidably, like two ships becalmed near each
other, and lay rubbing sides at last. I suppose Kurtz wanted an
audience, because on a certain occasion, when encamped in the forest,
they had talked all night, or more probably Kurtz had talked. ‘We
talked of everything,’ he said, quite transported at the recollection.
‘I forgot there was such a thing as sleep. The night did not seem to
last an hour. Everything! Everything!... Of love, too.’ ‘Ah, he talked
to you of love!’ I said, much amused. ‘It isn’t what you think,’ he
cried, almost passionately. ‘It was in general. He made me see
things—things.’

“He threw his arms up. We were on deck at the time, and the headman of
my wood-cutters, lounging near by, turned upon him his heavy and
glittering eyes. I looked around, and I don’t know why, but I assure
you that never, never before, did this land, this river, this jungle,
the very arch of this blazing sky, appear to me so hopeless and so
dark, so impenetrable to human thought, so pitiless to human weakness.
‘And, ever since, you have been with him, of course?’ I said.

“On the contrary. It appears their intercourse had been very much
broken by various causes. He had, as he informed me proudly, managed to
nurse Kurtz through two illnesses (he alluded to it as you would to
some risky feat), but as a rule Kurtz wandered alone, far in the depths
of the forest. ‘Very often coming to this station, I had to wait days
and days before he would turn up,’ he said. ‘Ah, it was worth waiting
for!—sometimes.’ ‘What was he doing? exploring or what?’ I asked. ‘Oh,
yes, of course’; he had discovered lots of villages, a lake, too—he did
not know exactly in what direction; it was dangerous to inquire too
much—but mostly his expeditions had been for ivory. ‘But he had no
goods to trade with by that time,’ I objected. ‘There’s a good lot of
cartridges left even yet,’ he answered, looking away. ‘To speak
plainly, he raided the country,’ I said. He nodded. ‘Not alone,
surely!’ He muttered something about the villages round that lake.
‘Kurtz got the tribe to follow him, did he?’ I suggested. He fidgeted a
little. ‘They adored him,’ he said. The tone of these words was so
extraordinary that I looked at him searchingly. It was curious to see
his mingled eagerness and reluctance to speak of Kurtz. The man filled
his life, occupied his th