wounded man! I could not help
saying, ‘You made a glorious lot of smoke, anyhow.’ I had seen, from
the way the tops of the bushes rustled and flew, that almost all the
shots had gone too high. You can’t hit anything unless you take aim and
fire from the shoulder; but these chaps fired from the hip with their
eyes shut. The retreat, I maintained—and I was right—was caused by the
screeching of the steam whistle. Upon this they forgot Kurtz, and began
to howl at me with indignant protests.

“The manager stood by the wheel murmuring confidentially about the
necessity of getting well away down the river before dark at all
events, when I saw in the distance a clearing on the riverside and the
outlines of some sort of building. ‘What’s this?’ I asked. He clapped
his hands in wonder. ‘The station!’ he cried. I edged in at once, still
going half-speed.

“Through my glasses I saw the slope of a hill interspersed with rare
trees and perfectly free from undergrowth. A long decaying building on
the summit was half buried in the high grass; the large holes in the
peaked roof gaped black from afar; the jungle and the woods made a
background. There was no enclosure or fence of any kind; but there had
been one apparently, for near the house half-a-dozen slim posts
remained in a row, roughly trimmed, and with their upper ends
ornamented with round carved balls. The rails, or whatever there had
been between, had disappeared. Of course the forest surrounded all
that. The river-bank was clear, and on the waterside I saw a white man
under a hat like a cart-wheel beckoning persistently with his whole
arm. Examining the edge of the forest above and below, I was almost
certain I could see movements—human forms gliding here and there. I
steamed past prudently, then stopped the engines and let her drift
down. The man on the shore began to shout, urging us to land. ‘We have
been attacked,’ screamed the manager. ‘I know—I know. It’s all right,’
yelled back the other, as cheerful as you please. ‘Come along. It’s all
right. I am glad.’

“His aspect reminded me of something I had seen—something funny I had
seen somewhere. As I manoeuvred to get alongside, I was asking myself,
‘What does this fellow look like?’ Suddenly I got it. He looked like a
harlequin. His clothes had been made of some stuff that was brown
holland probably, but it was covered with patches all over, with bright
patches, blue, red, and yellow—patches on the back, patches on the
front, patches on elbows, on knees; coloured binding around his jacket,
scarlet edging at the bottom of his trousers; and the sunshine made him
look extremely gay and wonderfully neat withal, because you could see
how beautifully all this patching had been done. A beardless, boyish
face, very fair, no features to speak of, nose peeling, little blue
eyes, smiles and frowns chasing each other over that open countenance
like sunshine and shadow on a wind-swept plain. ‘Look out, captain!’ he
cried; ‘there’s a snag lodged in here last night.’ What! Another snag?
I confess I swore shamefully. I had nearly holed my cripple, to finish
off that charming trip. The harlequin on the bank turned his little
pug-nose up to me. ‘You English?’ he asked, all smiles. ‘Are you?’ I
shouted from the wheel. The smiles vanished, and he shook his head as
if sorry for my disappointment. Then he brightened up. ‘Never mind!’ he
cried encouragingly. ‘Are we in time?’ I asked. ‘He is up there,’ he
replied, with a toss of the head up the hill, and becoming gloomy all
of a sudden. His face was like the autumn sky, overcast one moment and
bright the next.

“When the manager, escorted by the pilgrims, all of them armed to the
teeth, had gone to the house this chap came on board. ‘I say, I don’t
like this. These natives are in the bush,’ I said. He assured me
earnestly it was all right. ‘They are simple people,’ he added; ‘well,
I am glad you came. It took me all my time to keep them off.