ly happiness. She saw, with the creative eye
of fancy, the streets of that gay bathing-place covered with officers.
She saw herself the object of attention to tens and to scores of them at
present unknown. She saw all the glories of the camp: its tents
stretched forth in beauteous uniformity of lines, crowded with the young
and the gay, and dazzling with scarlet; and, to complete the view, she
saw herself seated beneath a tent, tenderly flirting with at least six
officers at once.

[Illustration:

“Tenderly flirting”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

Had she known that her sister sought to tear her from such prospects and
such realities as these, what would have been her sensations? They could
have been understood only by her mother, who might have felt nearly the
same. Lydia’s going to Brighton was all that consoled her for the
melancholy conviction of her husband’s never intending to go there
himself.

But they were entirely ignorant of what had passed; and their raptures
continued, with little intermission, to the very day of Lydia’s leaving
home.

Elizabeth was now to see Mr. Wickham for the last time. Having been
frequently in company with him since her return, agitation was pretty
well over; the agitations of former partiality entirely so. She had even
learnt to detect, in the very gentleness which had first delighted her,
an affectation and a sameness to disgust and weary. In his present
behaviour to herself, moreover, she had a fresh source of displeasure;
for the inclination he soon testified of renewing those attentions which
had marked the early part of their acquaintance could only serve, after
what had since passed, to provoke her. She lost all concern for him in
finding herself thus selected as the object of such idle and frivolous
gallantry; and while she steadily repressed it, could not but feel the
reproof contained in his believing, that however long, and for whatever
cause, his attentions had been withdrawn, her vanity would be gratified,
and her preference secured, at any time, by their renewal.

On the very last day of the regiment’s remaining in Meryton, he dined,
with others of the officers, at Longbourn; and so little was Elizabeth
disposed to part from him in good-humour, that, on his making some
inquiry as to the manner in which her time had passed at Hunsford, she
mentioned Colonel Fitzwilliam’s and Mr. Darcy’s having both spent three
weeks at Rosings, and asked him if he were acquainted with the former.

He looked surprised, displeased, alarmed; but, with a moment’s
recollection, and a returning smile, replied, that he had formerly seen
him often; and, after observing that he was a very gentlemanlike man,
asked her how she had liked him. Her answer was warmly in his favour.
With an air of indifference, he soon afterwards added, “How long did you
say that he was at Rosings?”

“Nearly three weeks.”

“And you saw him frequently?”

“Yes, almost every day.”

“His manners are very different from his cousin’s.”

“Yes, very different; but I think Mr. Darcy improves on acquaintance.”

“Indeed!” cried Wickham, with a look which did not escape her. “And pray
may I ask--” but checking himself, he added, in a gayer tone, “Is it in
address that he improves? Has he deigned to add aught of civility to his
ordinary style? for I dare not hope,” he continued, in a lower and more
serious tone, “that he is improved in essentials.”

“Oh, no!” said Elizabeth. “In essentials, I believe, he is very much
what he ever was.”

While she spoke, Wickham looked as if scarcely knowing whether to
rejoice over her words or to distrust their meaning. There was a
something in her countenance which made him listen with an apprehensive
and anxious attention, while she added,--

“When I said that he improved on acquaintance, I did not mean that
either his mind or manners were in a state of improvement; but that,
from knowing him better, his disposition w