 Dantès, who had his own projects, would not
agree for a longer time than three months.

_La Jeune Amélie_ had a very active crew, very obedient to their
captain, who lost as little time as possible. He had scarcely been a
week at Leghorn before the hold of his vessel was filled with printed
muslins, contraband cottons, English powder, and tobacco on which the
excise had forgotten to put its mark. The master was to get all this
out of Leghorn free of duties, and land it on the shores of Corsica,
where certain speculators undertook to forward the cargo to France.

They sailed; Edmond was again cleaving the azure sea which had been the
first horizon of his youth, and which he had so often dreamed of in
prison. He left Gorgone on his right and La Pianosa on his left, and
went towards the country of Paoli and Napoleon.

The next morning going on deck, as he always did at an early hour, the
patron found Dantès leaning against the bulwarks gazing with intense
earnestness at a pile of granite rocks, which the rising sun tinged
with rosy light. It was the Island of Monte Cristo.

_La Jeune Amélie_ left it three-quarters of a league to the larboard
and kept on for Corsica. Dantès thought, as they passed so closely to
the island whose name was so interesting to him, that he had only to
leap into the sea and in half an hour be at the promised land. But then
what could he do without instruments to discover his treasure, without
arms to defend himself? Besides, what would the sailors say? What would
the patron think? He must wait.

Fortunately, Dantès had learned how to wait; he had waited fourteen
years for his liberty, and now he was free he could wait at least six
months or a year for wealth. Would he not have accepted liberty without
riches if it had been offered to him? Besides, were not those riches
chimerical?—offspring of the brain of the poor Abbé Faria, had they not
died with him? It is true, the letter of the Cardinal Spada was
singularly circumstantial, and Dantès repeated it to himself, from one
end to the other, for he had not forgotten a word.

0285m



Evening came, and Edmond saw the island tinged with the shades of
twilight, and then disappear in the darkness from all eyes but his own,
for he, with vision accustomed to the gloom of a prison, continued to
behold it last of all, for he remained alone upon deck. The next morn
broke off the coast of Aleria; all day they coasted, and in the evening
saw fires lighted on land; the position of these was no doubt a signal
for landing, for a ship’s lantern was hung up at the mast-head instead
of the streamer, and they came to within a gunshot of the shore. Dantès
noticed that the captain of _La Jeune Amélie_ had, as he neared the
land, mounted two small culverins, which, without making much noise,
can throw a four ounce ball a thousand paces or so.

But on this occasion the precaution was superfluous, and everything
proceeded with the utmost smoothness and politeness. Four shallops came
off with very little noise alongside the lugger, which, no doubt, in
acknowledgement of the compliment, lowered her own shallop into the
sea, and the five boats worked so well that by two o’clock in the
morning all the cargo was out of _La Jeune Amélie_ and on _terra
firma_. The same night, such a man of regularity was the patron of _La
Jeune Amélie_, the profits were divided, and each man had a hundred
Tuscan livres, or about eighty francs.

But the voyage was not ended. They turned the bowsprit towards
Sardinia, where they intended to take in a cargo, which was to replace
what had been discharged. The second operation was as successful as the
first, _La Jeune Amélie_ was in luck. This new cargo was destined for
the coast of the Duchy of Lucca, and consisted almost entirely of
Havana cigars, sherry, and Malaga wines.

There they had a bit of a skirmish in getting rid of the duties; the
excise was, in truth, the everlasting enem