the battle-field or in the murderous nights of
Algeria, shaken around him more dreadful fire. He drew back terrified.

As for Monte Cristo, after this ebullition he closed his eyes as if
dazzled by internal light. In a moment he restrained himself so
powerfully that the tempestuous heaving of his breast subsided, as
turbulent and foaming waves yield to the sun’s genial influence when
the cloud has passed. This silence, self-control, and struggle lasted
about twenty seconds, then the count raised his pallid face.

“See,” said he, “my dear friend, how God punishes the most thoughtless
and unfeeling men for their indifference, by presenting dreadful scenes
to their view. I, who was looking on, an eager and curious
spectator,—I, who was watching the working of this mournful tragedy,—I,
who like a wicked angel was laughing at the evil men committed
protected by secrecy (a secret is easily kept by the rich and
powerful), I am in my turn bitten by the serpent whose tortuous course
I was watching, and bitten to the heart!”

Morrel groaned.

“Come, come,” continued the count, “complaints are unavailing, be a
man, be strong, be full of hope, for I am here and will watch over
you.”

Morrel shook his head sorrowfully.

“I tell you to hope. Do you understand me?” cried Monte Cristo.
“Remember that I never uttered a falsehood and am never deceived. It is
twelve o’clock, Maximilian; thank heaven that you came at noon rather
than in the evening, or tomorrow morning. Listen, Morrel—it is noon; if
Valentine is not now dead, she will not die.”

“How so?” cried Morrel, “when I left her dying?”

Monte Cristo pressed his hands to his forehead. What was passing in
that brain, so loaded with dreadful secrets? What does the angel of
light or the angel of darkness say to that mind, at once implacable and
generous? God only knows.

Monte Cristo raised his head once more, and this time he was calm as a
child awaking from its sleep.

“Maximilian,” said he, “return home. I command you not to stir—attempt
nothing, not to let your countenance betray a thought, and I will send
you tidings. Go.”

“Oh, count, you overwhelm me with that coolness. Have you, then, power
against death? Are you superhuman? Are you an angel?” And the young
man, who had never shrunk from danger, shrank before Monte Cristo with
indescribable terror. But Monte Cristo looked at him with so melancholy
and sweet a smile, that Maximilian felt the tears filling his eyes.

“I can do much for you, my friend,” replied the count. “Go; I must be
alone.”

Morrel, subdued by the extraordinary ascendancy Monte Cristo exercised
over everything around him, did not endeavor to resist it. He pressed
the count’s hand and left. He stopped one moment at the door for
Baptistin, whom he saw in the Rue Matignon, and who was running.

Meanwhile, Villefort and d’Avrigny had made all possible haste,
Valentine had not revived from her fainting fit on their arrival, and
the doctor examined the invalid with all the care the circumstances
demanded, and with an interest which the knowledge of the secret
intensified twofold. Villefort, closely watching his countenance and
his lips, awaited the result of the examination. Noirtier, paler than
even the young girl, more eager than Villefort for the decision, was
watching also intently and affectionately.

At last d’Avrigny slowly uttered these words: “She is still alive!”

“Still?” cried Villefort; “oh, doctor, what a dreadful word is that.”

“Yes,” said the physician, “I repeat it; she is still alive, and I am
astonished at it.”

“But is she safe?” asked the father.

“Yes, since she lives.”

At that moment d’Avrigny’s glance met Noirtier’s eye. It glistened with
such extraordinary joy, so rich and full of thought, that the physician
was struck. He placed the young girl again on the chair,—her lips were
scarcely discernible, they were so pale and white, as well as her whole
face,—and rema