”

The count took into his hands the papers, which Danglars had so proudly
presented to him, and read:—

“‘To the Governor of the Bank. Please pay to my order, from the fund
deposited by me, the sum of a million, and charge the same to my
account.

“Baron Danglars.’”

“One, two, three, four, five,” said Monte Cristo; “five millions—why
what a Crœsus you are!”

“This is how I transact business,” said Danglars.

“It is really wonderful,” said the count; “above all, if, as I suppose,
it is payable at sight.”

“It is, indeed,” said Danglars.

“It is a fine thing to have such credit; really, it is only in France
these things are done. Five millions on five little scraps of paper!—it
must be seen to be believed.”

“You do not doubt it?”

“No!”

“You say so with an accent—stay, you shall be convinced; take my clerk
to the bank, and you will see him leave it with an order on the
Treasury for the same sum.”

“No,” said Monte Cristo folding the five notes, “most decidedly not;
the thing is so curious, I will make the experiment myself. I am
credited on you for six millions. I have drawn nine hundred thousand
francs, you therefore still owe me five millions and a hundred thousand
francs. I will take the five scraps of paper that I now hold as bonds,
with your signature alone, and here is a receipt in full for the six
millions between us. I had prepared it beforehand, for I am much in
want of money today.”

And Monte Cristo placed the bonds in his pocket with one hand, while
with the other he held out the receipt to Danglars. If a thunderbolt
had fallen at the banker’s feet, he could not have experienced greater
terror.

“What,” he stammered, “do you mean to keep that money? Excuse me,
excuse me, but I owe this money to the charity fund,—a deposit which I
promised to pay this morning.”

“Oh, well, then,” said Monte Cristo, “I am not particular about these
five notes, pay me in a different form; I wished, from curiosity, to
take these, that I might be able to say that without any advice or
preparation the house of Danglars had paid me five millions without a
minute’s delay; it would have been remarkable. But here are your bonds;
pay me differently;” and he held the bonds towards Danglars, who seized
them like a vulture extending its claws to withhold the food that is
being wrested from its grasp.

Suddenly he rallied, made a violent effort to restrain himself, and
then a smile gradually widened the features of his disturbed
countenance.

50109m



“Certainly,” he said, “your receipt is money.”

“Oh dear, yes; and if you were at Rome, the house of Thomson & French
would make no more difficulty about paying the money on my receipt than
you have just done.”

“Pardon me, count, pardon me.”

“Then I may keep this money?”

“Yes,” said Danglars, while the perspiration started from the roots of
his hair. “Yes, keep it—keep it.”

Monte Cristo replaced the notes in his pocket with that indescribable
expression which seemed to say, “Come, reflect; if you repent there is
still time.”

“No,” said Danglars, “no, decidedly no; keep my signatures. But you
know none are so formal as bankers in transacting business; I intended
this money for the charity fund, and I seemed to be robbing them if I
did not pay them with these precise bonds. How absurd—as if one crown
were not as good as another. Excuse me;” and he began to laugh loudly,
but nervously.

“Certainly, I excuse you,” said Monte Cristo graciously, “and pocket
them.” And he placed the bonds in his pocket-book.

“But,” said Danglars, “there is still a sum of one hundred thousand
francs?”

“Oh, a mere nothing,” said Monte Cristo. “The balance would come to
about that sum; but keep it, and we shall be quits.”

“Count,” said Danglars, “are you speaking seriously?”

“I never joke with bankers,” said Monte Cristo in a freezing manner,
which repelled impertinence; and he turned to the door, just as the
v