re both forewarned.”

The young men bowed, and quitted the box. Upon reaching their stalls,
they found the whole of the audience in the parterre standing up and
directing their gaze towards the box formerly possessed by the Russian
ambassador. A man of from thirty-five to forty years of age, dressed in
deep black, had just entered, accompanied by a young woman dressed
after the Eastern style. The lady was surpassingly beautiful, while the
rich magnificence of her attire drew all eyes upon her.

“Hullo,” said Albert; “it is Monte Cristo and his Greek!”

The strangers were, indeed, no other than the count and Haydée. In a
few moments the young girl had attracted the attention of the whole
house, and even the occupants of the boxes leaned forward to scrutinize
her magnificent diamonds.

The second act passed away during one continued buzz of voices—one deep
whisper—intimating that some great and universally interesting event
had occurred; all eyes, all thoughts, were occupied with the young and
beautiful woman, whose gorgeous apparel and splendid jewels made a most
extraordinary spectacle.

Upon this occasion an unmistakable sign from Madame Danglars intimated
her desire to see Albert in her box directly the curtain fell on the
second act, and neither the politeness nor good taste of Morcerf would
permit his neglecting an invitation so unequivocally given. At the
close of the act he therefore went to the baroness.

Having bowed to the two ladies, he extended his hand to Debray. By the
baroness he was most graciously welcomed, while Eugénie received him
with her accustomed coldness.

“My dear fellow,” said Debray, “you have come in the nick of time.
There is madame overwhelming me with questions respecting the count;
she insists upon it that I can tell her his birth, education, and
parentage, where he came from, and whither he is going. Being no
disciple of Cagliostro, I was wholly unable to do this; so, by way of
getting out of the scrape, I said, ‘Ask Morcerf; he has got the whole
history of his beloved Monte Cristo at his fingers’ ends;’ whereupon
the baroness signified her desire to see you.”

“Is it not almost incredible,” said Madame Danglars, “that a person
having at least half a million of secret-service money at his command,
should possess so little information?”

“Let me assure you, madame,” said Lucien, “that had I really the sum
you mention at my disposal, I would employ it more profitably than in
troubling myself to obtain particulars respecting the Count of Monte
Cristo, whose only merit in my eyes consists in his being twice as rich
as a nabob. However, I have turned the business over to Morcerf, so
pray settle it with him as may be most agreeable to you; for my own
part, I care nothing about the count or his mysterious doings.”

30093m



“I am very sure no nabob would have sent me a pair of horses worth
32,000 francs, wearing on their heads four diamonds valued at 5,000
francs each.”

“He seems to have a mania for diamonds,” said Morcerf, smiling, “and I
verily believe that, like Potemkin, he keeps his pockets filled, for
the sake of strewing them along the road, as Tom Thumb did his flint
stones.”

“Perhaps he has discovered some mine,” said Madame Danglars. “I suppose
you know he has an order for unlimited credit on the baron’s banking
establishment?”

“I was not aware of it,” replied Albert, “but I can readily believe
it.”

“And, further, that he stated to M. Danglars his intention of only
staying a year in Paris, during which time he proposed to spend six
millions.

“He must be the Shah of Persia, travelling _incog_.”

“Have you noticed the remarkable beauty of the young woman, M. Lucien?”
inquired Eugénie.

“I really never met with one woman so ready to do justice to the charms
of another as yourself,” responded Lucien, raising his lorgnette to his
eye. “A most lovely creature, upon my soul!” was his verdict.

“Who is this 