e master if the coachman knew through what streets he went. “What
must be done then?” asked the general.—“I have my carriage here,” said
the president.

“‘“Have you, then, so much confidence in your servant that you can
intrust him with a secret you will not allow me to know?”

“‘“Our coachman is a member of the club,” said the president; “we shall
be driven by a State-Councillor.”

“‘“Then we run another risk,” said the general, laughing, “that of
being upset.” We insert this joke to prove that the general was not in
the least compelled to attend the meeting, but that he came willingly.
When they were seated in the carriage the president reminded the
general of his promise to allow his eyes to be bandaged, to which he
made no opposition. On the road the president thought he saw the
general make an attempt to remove the handkerchief, and reminded him of
his oath. “Sure enough,” said the general. The carriage stopped at an
alley leading out of the Rue Saint-Jacques. The general alighted,
leaning on the arm of the president, of whose dignity he was not aware,
considering him simply as a member of the club; they went through the
alley, mounted a flight of stairs, and entered the assembly-room.

“‘The deliberations had already begun. The members, apprised of the
sort of presentation which was to be made that evening, were all in
attendance. When in the middle of the room the general was invited to
remove his bandage, he did so immediately, and was surprised to see so
many well-known faces in a society of whose existence he had till then
been ignorant. They questioned him as to his sentiments, but he
contented himself with answering, that the letters from the Island of
Elba ought to have informed them——’”

Franz interrupted himself by saying, “My father was a royalist; they
need not have asked his sentiments, which were well known.”

“And hence,” said Villefort, “arose my affection for your father, my
dear M. Franz. Opinions held in common are a ready bond of union.”

“Read again,” said the old man.

Franz continued:

“‘The president then sought to make him speak more explicitly, but M.
de Quesnel replied that he wished first to know what they wanted with
him. He was then informed of the contents of the letter from the Island
of Elba, in which he was recommended to the club as a man who would be
likely to advance the interests of their party. One paragraph spoke of
the return of Bonaparte and promised another letter and further
details, on the arrival of the _Pharaon_ belonging to the shipbuilder
Morrel, of Marseilles, whose captain was entirely devoted to the
emperor. During all this time, the general, on whom they thought to
have relied as on a brother, manifested evidently signs of discontent
and repugnance. When the reading was finished, he remained silent, with
knitted brows.

“‘“Well,” asked the president, “what do you say to this letter,
general?”

“‘“I say that it is too soon after declaring myself for Louis XVIII. to
break my vow in behalf of the ex-emperor.” This answer was too clear to
permit of any mistake as to his sentiments. “General,” said the
president, “we acknowledge no King Louis XVIII., or an ex-emperor, but
his majesty the emperor and king, driven from France, which is his
kingdom, by violence and treason.”

“‘“Excuse me, gentlemen,” said the general; “you may not acknowledge
Louis XVIII., but I do, as he has made me a baron and a field-marshal,
and I shall never forget that for these two titles I am indebted to his
happy return to France.”

“‘“Sir,” said the president, rising with gravity, “be careful what you
say; your words clearly show us that they are deceived concerning you
in the Island of Elba, and have deceived us! The communication has been
made to you in consequence of the confidence placed in you, and which
does you honor. Now we discover our error; a title and promotion attach
you to the government we wish to overturn. We w