e count’s “yes.”

The whole journey was performed with equal rapidity; the thirty-two
horses, dispersed over seven stages, brought them to their destination
in eight hours. At midnight they arrived at the gate of a beautiful
park. The porter was in attendance; he had been apprised by the groom
of the last stage of the count’s approach. At half past two in the
morning Morcerf was conducted to his apartments, where a bath and
supper were prepared. The servant who had travelled at the back of the
carriage waited on him; Baptistin, who rode in front, attended the
count.

Albert bathed, took his supper, and went to bed. All night he was
lulled by the melancholy noise of the surf. On rising, he went to his
window, which opened on a terrace, having the sea in front, and at the
back a pretty park bounded by a small forest.

In a creek lay a little sloop, with a narrow keel and high masts,
bearing on its flag the Monte Cristo arms which were a mountain _or_,
on a sea _azure_, with a cross _gules_ in chief which might be an
allusion to his name that recalled Calvary, the mount rendered by our
Lord’s passion more precious than gold, and to the degrading cross
which his blood had rendered holy; or it might be some personal
remembrance of suffering and regeneration buried in the night of this
mysterious personage’s past life.

Around the schooner lay a number of small fishing-boats belonging to
the fishermen of the neighboring village, like humble subjects awaiting
orders from their queen. There, as in every spot where Monte Cristo
stopped, if but for two days, luxury abounded and life went on with the
utmost ease.

Albert found in his anteroom two guns, with all the accoutrements for
hunting; a lofty room on the ground floor containing all the ingenious
instruments the English—eminent in piscatory pursuits, since they are
patient and sluggish—have invented for fishing. The day passed in
pursuing those exercises in which Monte Cristo excelled. They killed a
dozen pheasants in the park, as many trout in the stream, dined in a
summer-house overlooking the ocean, and took tea in the library.

Towards the evening of the third day. Albert, completely exhausted with
the exercise which invigorated Monte Cristo, was sleeping in an
armchair near the window, while the count was designing with his
architect the plan of a conservatory in his house, when the sound of a
horse at full speed on the high road made Albert look up. He was
disagreeably surprised to see his own valet de chambre, whom he had not
brought, that he might not inconvenience Monte Cristo.

40188m



“Florentin here!” cried he, starting up; “is my mother ill?” And he
hastened to the door. Monte Cristo watched and saw him approach the
valet, who drew a small sealed parcel from his pocket, containing a
newspaper and a letter.

“From whom is this?” said he eagerly.

“From M. Beauchamp,” replied Florentin.

“Did he send you?”

“Yes, sir; he sent for me to his house, gave me money for my journey,
procured a horse, and made me promise not to stop till I had reached
you, I have come in fifteen hours.”

Albert opened the letter with fear, uttered a shriek on reading the
first line, and seized the paper. His sight was dimmed, his legs sank
under him, and he would have fallen had not Florentin supported him.

“Poor young man,” said Monte Cristo in a low voice; “it is then true
that the sin of the father shall fall on the children to the third and
fourth generation.”

Meanwhile Albert had revived, and, continuing to read, he threw back
his head, saying:

“Florentin, is your horse fit to return immediately?”

“It is a poor, lame post-horse.”

“In what state was the house when you left?”

“All was quiet, but on returning from M. Beauchamp’s, I found madame in
tears; she had sent for me to know when you would return. I told her my
orders from M. Beauchamp; she first extended her arms to prevent me,
but after a mo