theatrical life; and acting upon this
principle, the banker’s daughter, though perfectly willing to allow
Mademoiselle Louise d’Armilly (that was the name of the young virtuosa)
to practice with her through the day, took especial care not to be seen
in her company. Still, though not actually received at the Hôtel
Danglars in the light of an acknowledged friend, Louise was treated
with far more kindness and consideration than is usually bestowed on a
governess.

The curtain fell almost immediately after the entrance of Madame
Danglars into her box, the band quitted the orchestra for the
accustomed half-hour’s interval allowed between the acts, and the
audience were left at liberty to promenade the salon or lobbies, or to
pay and receive visits in their respective boxes.

Morcerf and Château-Renaud were amongst the first to avail themselves
of this permission. For an instant the idea struck Madame Danglars that
this eagerness on the part of the young viscount arose from his
impatience to join her party, and she whispered her expectations to her
daughter, that Albert was hurrying to pay his respects to them.
Mademoiselle Eugénie, however, merely returned a dissenting movement of
the head, while, with a cold smile, she directed the attention of her
mother to an opposite box on the first circle, in which sat the
Countess G——, and where Morcerf had just made his appearance.

30087m



“So we meet again, my travelling friend, do we?” cried the countess,
extending her hand to him with all the warmth and cordiality of an old
acquaintance; “it was really very good of you to recognize me so
quickly, and still more so to bestow your first visit on me.”

“Be assured,” replied Albert, “that if I had been aware of your arrival
in Paris, and had known your address, I should have paid my respects to
you before this. Allow me to introduce my friend, Baron de
Château-Renaud, one of the few true gentlemen now to be found in
France, and from whom I have just learned that you were a spectator of
the races in the Champ-de-Mars, yesterday.”

Château-Renaud bowed to the countess.

“So you were at the races, baron?” inquired the countess eagerly.

“Yes, madame.”

“Well, then,” pursued Madame G—— with considerable animation, “you can
probably tell me who won the Jockey Club stakes?”

“I am sorry to say I cannot,” replied the baron; “and I was just asking
the same question of Albert.”

“Are you very anxious to know, countess?” asked Albert.

“To know what?”

“The name of the owner of the winning horse?”

“Excessively; only imagine—but do tell me, viscount, whether you really
are acquainted with it or no?”

“I beg your pardon, madame, but you were about to relate some story,
were you not? You said, ‘only imagine,’—and then paused. Pray
continue.”

“Well, then, listen. You must know I felt so interested in the splendid
roan horse, with his elegant little rider, so tastefully dressed in a
pink satin jacket and cap, that I could not help praying for their
success with as much earnestness as though the half of my fortune were
at stake; and when I saw them outstrip all the others, and come to the
winning-post in such gallant style, I actually clapped my hands with
joy. Imagine my surprise, when, upon returning home, the first object I
met on the staircase was the identical jockey in the pink jacket! I
concluded that, by some singular chance, the owner of the winning horse
must live in the same hotel as myself; but, as I entered my apartments,
I beheld the very gold cup awarded as a prize to the unknown horse and
rider. Inside the cup was a small piece of paper, on which were written
these words—‘From Lord Ruthven to Countess G——.’”

“Precisely; I was sure of it,” said Morcerf.

“Sure of what?”

“That the owner of the horse was Lord Ruthven himself.”

“What Lord Ruthven do you mean?”

“Why, our Lord Ruthven—the Vampire of the Salle Argentina!”

“Is it possible?” exclaimed 