ls to
him his plighted word, and this man fails to redeem the pledge, he has
at least a right to exact from him a good reason for so doing.”

Danglars was a coward, but did not wish to appear so; he was piqued at
the tone which Morcerf had just assumed.

“I am not without a good reason for my conduct,” replied the banker.

“What do you mean to say?”

“I mean to say that I have a good reason, but that it is difficult to
explain.”

“You must be aware, at all events, that it is impossible for me to
understand motives before they are explained to me; but one thing at
least is clear, which is, that you decline allying yourself with my
family.”

“No, sir,” said Danglars; “I merely suspend my decision, that is all.”

“And do you really flatter yourself that I shall yield to all your
caprices, and quietly and humbly await the time of again being received
into your good graces?”

“Then, count, if you will not wait, we must look upon these projects as
if they had never been entertained.”

The count bit his lips till the blood almost started, to prevent the
ebullition of anger which his proud and irritable temper scarcely
allowed him to restrain; understanding, however, that in the present
state of things the laugh would decidedly be against him, he turned
from the door, towards which he had been directing his steps, and again
confronted the banker. A cloud settled on his brow, evincing decided
anxiety and uneasiness, instead of the expression of offended pride
which had lately reigned there.

“My dear Danglars,” said Morcerf, “we have been acquainted for many
years, and consequently we ought to make some allowance for each
other’s failings. You owe me an explanation, and really it is but fair
that I should know what circumstance has occurred to deprive my son of
your favor.”

“It is from no personal ill-feeling towards the viscount, that is all I
can say, sir,” replied Danglars, who resumed his insolent manner as
soon as he perceived that Morcerf was a little softened and calmed
down.

“And towards whom do you bear this personal ill-feeling, then?” said
Morcerf, turning pale with anger. The expression of the count’s face
had not remained unperceived by the banker; he fixed on him a look of
greater assurance than before, and said:

“You may, perhaps, be better satisfied that I should not go farther
into particulars.”

A tremor of suppressed rage shook the whole frame of the count, and
making a violent effort over himself, he said: “I have a right to
insist on your giving me an explanation. Is it Madame de Morcerf who
has displeased you? Is it my fortune which you find insufficient? Is it
because my opinions differ from yours?”

“Nothing of the kind, sir,” replied Danglars: “if such had been the
case, I only should have been to blame, inasmuch as I was aware of all
these things when I made the engagement. No, do not seek any longer to
discover the reason. I really am quite ashamed to have been the cause
of your undergoing such severe self-examination; let us drop the
subject, and adopt the middle course of delay, which implies neither a
rupture nor an engagement. _Ma foi_, there is no hurry. My daughter is
only seventeen years old, and your son twenty-one. While we wait, time
will be progressing, events will succeed each other; things which in
the evening look dark and obscure, appear but too clearly in the light
of morning, and sometimes the utterance of one word, or the lapse of a
single day, will reveal the most cruel calumnies.”

“Calumnies, did you say, sir?” cried Morcerf, turning livid with rage.
“Does anyone dare to slander me?”

“Monsieur, I told you that I considered it best to avoid all
explanation.”

“Then, sir, I am patiently to submit to your refusal?”

“Yes, sir, although I assure you the refusal is as painful for me to
give as it is for you to receive, for I had reckoned on the honor of
your alliance, and the breaking off of a marriage con