stool beside him.

“You know,” said the abbé, “that I was the secretary and intimate
friend of Cardinal Spada, the last of the princes of that name. I owe
to this worthy lord all the happiness I ever knew. He was not rich,
although the wealth of his family had passed into a proverb, and I
heard the phrase very often, ‘As rich as a Spada.’ But he, like public
rumor, lived on this reputation for wealth; his palace was my paradise.
I was tutor to his nephews, who are dead; and when he was alone in the
world, I tried by absolute devotion to his will, to make up to him all
he had done for me during ten years of unremitting kindness. The
cardinal’s house had no secrets for me. I had often seen my noble
patron annotating ancient volumes, and eagerly searching amongst dusty
family manuscripts. One day when I was reproaching him for his
unavailing searches, and deploring the prostration of mind that
followed them, he looked at me, and, smiling bitterly, opened a volume
relating to the History of the City of Rome. There, in the twentieth
chapter of the Life of Pope Alexander VI., were the following lines,
which I can never forget:—

“‘The great wars of Romagna had ended; Cæsar Borgia, who had completed
his conquest, had need of money to purchase all Italy. The pope had
also need of money to bring matters to an end with Louis XII. King of
France, who was formidable still in spite of his recent reverses; and
it was necessary, therefore, to have recourse to some profitable
scheme, which was a matter of great difficulty in the impoverished
condition of exhausted Italy. His holiness had an idea. He determined
to make two cardinals.’

“By choosing two of the greatest personages of Rome, especially rich
men—_this_ was the return the Holy Father looked for. In the first
place, he could sell the great appointments and splendid offices which
the cardinals already held; and then he had the two hats to sell
besides. There was a third point in view, which will appear hereafter.

“The pope and Cæsar Borgia first found the two future cardinals; they
were Giovanni Rospigliosi, who held four of the highest dignities of
the Holy See, and Cæsar Spada, one of the noblest and richest of the
Roman nobility; both felt the high honor of such a favor from the pope.
They were ambitious, and Cæsar Borgia soon found purchasers for their
appointments. The result was, that Rospigliosi and Spada paid for being
cardinals, and eight other persons paid for the offices the cardinals
held before their elevation, and thus eight hundred thousand crowns
entered into the coffers of the speculators.

0239m



“It is time now to proceed to the last part of the speculation. The
pope heaped attentions upon Rospigliosi and Spada, conferred upon them
the insignia of the cardinalate, and induced them to arrange their
affairs and take up their residence at Rome. Then the pope and Cæsar
Borgia invited the two cardinals to dinner. This was a matter of
dispute between the Holy Father and his son. Cæsar thought they could
make use of one of the means which he always had ready for his friends,
that is to say, in the first place, the famous key which was given to
certain persons with the request that they go and open a designated
cupboard. This key was furnished with a small iron point,—a negligence
on the part of the locksmith. When this was pressed to effect the
opening of the cupboard, of which the lock was difficult, the person
was pricked by this small point, and died next day. Then there was the
ring with the lion’s head, which Cæsar wore when he wanted to greet his
friends with a clasp of the hand. The lion bit the hand thus favored,
and at the end of twenty-four hours, the bite was mortal.

“Cæsar proposed to his father, that they should either ask the
cardinals to open the cupboard, or shake hands with them; but Alexander
VI. replied: ‘Now as to the worthy cardinals, Spada and Rospigliosi,
let us ask both of them