wretched
cookery—which has been trying its best to poison me during the last
four months, while you have manfully resisted its effects for as many
years,—and obtaining a bed on which it is possible to slumber, Monte
Cristo has furnished for himself a temporary abode where you first
found him; but, to prevent the possibility of the Tuscan government
taking a fancy to his enchanted palace, and thereby depriving him of
the advantages naturally expected from so large an outlay of capital,
he has wisely enough purchased the island, and taken its name. Just ask
yourself, my good fellow, whether there are not many persons of our
acquaintance who assume the names of lands and properties they never in
their lives were masters of?”

“But,” said Franz, “the Corsican bandits that were among the crew of
his vessel?”

“Why, really the thing seems to me simple enough. Nobody knows better
than yourself that the bandits of Corsica are not rogues or thieves,
but purely and simply fugitives, driven by some sinister motive from
their native town or village, and that their fellowship involves no
disgrace or stigma; for my own part, I protest that, should I ever go
to Corsica, my first visit, ere even I presented myself to the mayor or
prefect, should be to the bandits of Colomba, if I could only manage to
find them; for, on my conscience, they are a race of men I admire
greatly.”

“Still,” persisted Franz, “I suppose you will allow that such men as
Vampa and his band are regular villains, who have no other motive than
plunder when they seize your person. How do you explain the influence
the count evidently possessed over those ruffians?”

“My good friend, as in all probability I own my present safety to that
influence, it would ill become me to search too closely into its
source; therefore, instead of condemning him for his intimacy with
outlaws, you must give me leave to excuse any little irregularity there
may be in such a connection; not altogether for preserving my life, for
my own idea was that it never was in much danger, but certainly for
saving me 4,000 piastres, which, being translated, means neither more
nor less than 24,000 livres of our money—a sum at which, most
assuredly, I should never have been estimated in France, proving most
indisputably,” added Albert with a laugh, “that no prophet is honored
in his own country.”

“Talking of countries,” replied Franz, “of what country is the count,
what is his native tongue, whence does he derive his immense fortune,
and what were those events of his early life—a life as marvellous as
unknown—that have tinctured his succeeding years with so dark and
gloomy a misanthropy? Certainly these are questions that, in your
place, I should like to have answered.”

“My dear Franz,” replied Albert, “when, upon receipt of my letter, you
found the necessity of asking the count’s assistance, you promptly went
to him, saying, ‘My friend Albert de Morcerf is in danger; help me to
deliver him.’ Was not that nearly what you said?”

20222m



“It was.”

“Well, then, did he ask you, ‘Who is M. Albert de Morcerf? how does he
come by his name—his fortune? what are his means of existence? what is
his birthplace? of what country is he a native?’ Tell me, did he put
all these questions to you?”

“I confess he asked me none.”

“No; he merely came and freed me from the hands of Signor Vampa, where,
I can assure you, in spite of all my outward appearance of ease and
unconcern, I did not very particularly care to remain. Now, then,
Franz, when, for services so promptly and unhesitatingly rendered, he
but asks me in return to do for him what is done daily for any Russian
prince or Italian nobleman who may pass through Paris—merely to
introduce him into society—would you have me refuse? My good fellow,
you must have lost your senses to think it possible I could act with
such cold-blooded policy.”

And this time it must be confessed that, contrary t