east hopes so.”

“Come upstairs with me, and I will give it to you.”

“I prefer waiting here,” said the messenger, with a smile.

“And why?”

“Your excellency will know when you have read the letter.”

“Shall I find you here, then?”

“Certainly.”

Franz entered the hotel. On the staircase he met Signor Pastrini.
“Well?” said the landlord.

“Well—what?” responded Franz.

“You have seen the man who desired to speak with you from your friend?”
he asked of Franz.

“Yes, I have seen him,” he replied, “and he has handed this letter to
me. Light the candles in my apartment, if you please.”

The innkeeper gave orders to a servant to go before Franz with a light.
The young man had found Signor Pastrini looking very much alarmed, and
this had only made him the more anxious to read Albert’s letter; and so
he went instantly towards the waxlight, and unfolded it. It was written
and signed by Albert. Franz read it twice before he could comprehend
what it contained. It was thus worded:

“My dear Fellow,

“The moment you have received this, have the kindness to take the
letter of credit from my pocket-book, which you will find in the square
drawer of the _secrétaire_; add your own to it, if it be not
sufficient. Run to Torlonia, draw from him instantly four thousand
piastres, and give them to the bearer. It is urgent that I should have
this money without delay. I do not say more, relying on you as you may
rely on me.

“Your friend,

“Albert de Morcerf.

“P.S.—I now believe in Italian _banditti_.”

Below these lines were written, in a strange hand, the following in
Italian:

“_Se alle sei della mattina le quattro mille piastre non sono nelle mie
mani, alla sette il Conte Alberto avrà cessato di vivere_.

“Luigi Vampa.”

“_If by six in the morning the four thousand piastres are not in my
hands, by seven o’clock the Count Albert will have ceased to live_.”

This second signature explained everything to Franz, who now understood
the objection of the messenger to coming up into the apartment; the
street was safer for him. Albert, then, had fallen into the hands of
the famous bandit chief, in whose existence he had for so long a time
refused to believe.

There was no time to lose. He hastened to open the _secrétaire_, and
found the pocket-book in the drawer, and in it the letter of credit.
There were in all six thousand piastres, but of these six thousand
Albert had already expended three thousand.

As to Franz, he had no letter of credit, as he lived at Florence, and
had only come to Rome to pass seven or eight days; he had brought but a
hundred louis, and of these he had not more than fifty left. Thus seven
or eight hundred piastres were wanting to them both to make up the sum
that Albert required. True, he might in such a case rely on the
kindness of Signor Torlonia. He was, therefore, about to return to the
Palazzo Bracciano without loss of time, when suddenly a luminous idea
crossed his mind.

He remembered the Count of Monte Cristo. Franz was about to ring for
Signor Pastrini, when that worthy presented himself.

“My dear sir,” he said, hastily, “do you know if the count is within?”

“Yes, your excellency; he has this moment returned.”

“Is he in bed?”

“I should say no.”

“Then ring at his door, if you please, and request him to be so kind as
to give me an audience.”

Signor Pastrini did as he was desired, and returning five minutes
after, he said:

“The count awaits your excellency.”

Franz went along the corridor, and a servant introduced him to the
count. He was in a small room which Franz had not yet seen, and which
was surrounded with divans. The count came towards him.

“Well, what good wind blows you hither at this hour?” said he; “have
you come to sup with me? It would be very kind of you.”

“No; I have come to speak to you of a very serious matter.”

“A serious matter,” said the count, looking at Franz with the
earnestness usu