ady for action, across the Thames estuary during the course of the
Martian conquest, vigilant and yet powerless to prevent it.

At the sight of the sea, Mrs. Elphinstone, in spite of the assurances
of her sister-in-law, gave way to panic. She had never been out of
England before, she would rather die than trust herself friendless in a
foreign country, and so forth. She seemed, poor woman, to imagine that
the French and the Martians might prove very similar. She had been
growing increasingly hysterical, fearful, and depressed during the two
days’ journeyings. Her great idea was to return to Stanmore. Things had
been always well and safe at Stanmore. They would find George at
Stanmore....

It was with the greatest difficulty they could get her down to the
beach, where presently my brother succeeded in attracting the attention
of some men on a paddle steamer from the Thames. They sent a boat and
drove a bargain for thirty-six pounds for the three. The steamer was
going, these men said, to Ostend.

It was about two o’clock when my brother, having paid their fares at
the gangway, found himself safely aboard the steamboat with his
charges. There was food aboard, albeit at exorbitant prices, and the
three of them contrived to eat a meal on one of the seats forward.

There were already a couple of score of passengers aboard, some of whom
had expended their last money in securing a passage, but the captain
lay off the Blackwater until five in the afternoon, picking up
passengers until the seated decks were even dangerously crowded. He
would probably have remained longer had it not been for the sound of
guns that began about that hour in the south. As if in answer, the
ironclad seaward fired a small gun and hoisted a string of flags. A jet
of smoke sprang out of her funnels.

Some of the passengers were of opinion that this firing came from
Shoeburyness, until it was noticed that it was growing louder. At the
same time, far away in the southeast the masts and upperworks of three
ironclads rose one after the other out of the sea, beneath clouds of
black smoke. But my brother’s attention speedily reverted to the
distant firing in the south. He fancied he saw a column of smoke rising
out of the distant grey haze.

The little steamer was already flapping her way eastward of the big
crescent of shipping, and the low Essex coast was growing blue and
hazy, when a Martian appeared, small and faint in the remote distance,
advancing along the muddy coast from the direction of Foulness. At that
the captain on the bridge swore at the top of his voice with fear and
anger at his own delay, and the paddles seemed infected with his
terror. Every soul aboard stood at the bulwarks or on the seats of the
steamer and stared at that distant shape, higher than the trees or
church towers inland, and advancing with a leisurely parody of a human
stride.

It was the first Martian my brother had seen, and he stood, more amazed
than terrified, watching this Titan advancing deliberately towards the
shipping, wading farther and farther into the water as the coast fell
away. Then, far away beyond the Crouch, came another, striding over
some stunted trees, and then yet another, still farther off, wading
deeply through a shiny mudflat that seemed to hang halfway up between
sea and sky. They were all stalking seaward, as if to intercept the
escape of the multitudinous vessels that were crowded between Foulness
and the Naze. In spite of the throbbing exertions of the engines of the
little paddle-boat, and the pouring foam that her wheels flung behind
her, she receded with terrifying slowness from this ominous advance.

Glancing northwestward, my brother saw the large crescent of shipping
already writhing with the approaching terror; one ship passing behind
another, another coming round from broadside to end on, steamships
whistling and giving off volumes of steam, sails being let out,
launches rushing hi