 a window; in
Monte Cristo’s opinion, the villains sought his life, not his money. It
would be his bedroom they would attack, and they must reach it by the
back staircase, or by the window in the dressing-room.

The clock of the Invalides struck a quarter to twelve; the west wind
bore on its moistened gusts the doleful vibration of the three strokes.

40152m



As the last stroke died away, the count thought he heard a slight noise
in the dressing-room; this first sound, or rather this first grinding,
was followed by a second, then a third; at the fourth, the count knew
what to expect. A firm and well-practised hand was engaged in cutting
the four sides of a pane of glass with a diamond. The count felt his
heart beat more rapidly.

Inured as men may be to danger, forewarned as they may be of peril,
they understand, by the fluttering of the heart and the shuddering of
the frame, the enormous difference between a dream and a reality,
between the project and the execution. However, Monte Cristo only made
a sign to apprise Ali, who, understanding that danger was approaching
from the other side, drew nearer to his master. Monte Cristo was eager
to ascertain the strength and number of his enemies.

The window whence the noise proceeded was opposite the opening by which
the count could see into the dressing-room. He fixed his eyes on that
window—he distinguished a shadow in the darkness; then one of the panes
became quite opaque, as if a sheet of paper were stuck on the outside,
then the square cracked without falling. Through the opening an arm was
passed to find the fastening, then a second; the window turned on its
hinges, and a man entered. He was alone.

“That’s a daring rascal,” whispered the count.

At that moment Ali touched him slightly on the shoulder. He turned; Ali
pointed to the window of the room in which they were, facing the
street.

“I see!” said he, “there are two of them; one does the work while the
other stands guard.” He made a sign to Ali not to lose sight of the man
in the street, and turned to the one in the dressing-room.

The glass-cutter had entered, and was feeling his way, his arms
stretched out before him. At last he appeared to have made himself
familiar with his surroundings. There were two doors; he bolted them
both.

When he drew near to the bedroom door, Monte Cristo expected that he
was coming in, and raised one of his pistols; but he simply heard the
sound of the bolts sliding in their copper rings. It was only a
precaution. The nocturnal visitor, ignorant of the fact that the count
had removed the staples, might now think himself at home, and pursue
his purpose with full security. Alone and free to act as he wished, the
man then drew from his pocket something which the count could not
discern, placed it on a stand, then went straight to the secretaire,
felt the lock, and contrary to his expectation found that the key was
missing. But the glass-cutter was a prudent man who had provided for
all emergencies. The count soon heard the rattling of a bunch of
skeleton keys, such as the locksmith brings when called to force a
lock, and which thieves call nightingales, doubtless from the music of
their nightly song when they grind against the bolt.

“Ah, ha,” whispered Monte Cristo with a smile of disappointment, “he is
only a thief.”

But the man in the dark could not find the right key. He reached the
instrument he had placed on the stand, touched a spring, and
immediately a pale light, just bright enough to render objects
distinct, was reflected on his hands and countenance.

“By heavens,” exclaimed Monte Cristo, starting back, “it is——”

Ali raised his hatchet.

“Don’t stir,” whispered Monte Cristo, “and put down your hatchet; we
shall require no arms.”

40154m



Then he added some words in a low tone, for the exclamation which
surprise had drawn from the count, faint as it had been, had startled
the man who remaine