his throat.”

“Many will walk by that road before the moon rises again,” said Baloo.
“He will have good hunting--after his own fashion.”

“But what was the meaning of it all?” said Mowgli, who did not know
anything of a python’s powers of fascination. “I saw no more than a big
snake making foolish circles till the dark came. And his nose was all
sore. Ho! Ho!”

“Mowgli,” said Bagheera angrily, “his nose was sore on thy account, as
my ears and sides and paws, and Baloo’s neck and shoulders are bitten
on thy account. Neither Baloo nor Bagheera will be able to hunt with
pleasure for many days.”

“It is nothing,” said Baloo; “we have the man-cub again.”

“True, but he has cost us heavily in time which might have been spent in
good hunting, in wounds, in hair--I am half plucked along my back--and
last of all, in honor. For, remember, Mowgli, I, who am the Black
Panther, was forced to call upon Kaa for protection, and Baloo and I
were both made stupid as little birds by the Hunger Dance. All this,
man-cub, came of thy playing with the Bandar-log.”

“True, it is true,” said Mowgli sorrowfully. “I am an evil man-cub, and
my stomach is sad in me.”

“Mf! What says the Law of the Jungle, Baloo?”

Baloo did not wish to bring Mowgli into any more trouble, but he could
not tamper with the Law, so he mumbled: “Sorrow never stays punishment.
But remember, Bagheera, he is very little.”

“I will remember. But he has done mischief, and blows must be dealt now.
Mowgli, hast thou anything to say?”

“Nothing. I did wrong. Baloo and thou are wounded. It is just.”

Bagheera gave him half a dozen love-taps from a panther’s point of
view (they would hardly have waked one of his own cubs), but for a
seven-year-old boy they amounted to as severe a beating as you could
wish to avoid. When it was all over Mowgli sneezed, and picked himself
up without a word.

“Now,” said Bagheera, “jump on my back, Little Brother, and we will go
home.”

One of the beauties of Jungle Law is that punishment settles all scores.
There is no nagging afterward.

Mowgli laid his head down on Bagheera’s back and slept so deeply that he
never waked when he was put down in the home-cave.




Road-Song of the Bandar-Log

     Here we go in a flung festoon,
     Half-way up to the jealous moon!
     Don’t you envy our pranceful bands?
     Don’t you wish you had extra hands?
     Wouldn’t you like if your tails were--so--
     Curved in the shape of a Cupid’s bow?
        Now you’re angry, but--never mind,
        _Brother, thy tail hangs down behind!_

     Here we sit in a branchy row,
     Thinking of beautiful things we know;
     Dreaming of deeds that we mean to do,
     All complete, in a minute or two--
     Something noble and wise and good,
     Done by merely wishing we could.
        We’ve forgotten, but--never mind,
        _Brother, thy tail hangs down behind!_

     All the talk we ever have heard
     Uttered by bat or beast or bird--
     Hide or fin or scale or feather--
     Jabber it quickly and all together!
     Excellent!  Wonderful!  Once again!

     Now we are talking just like men!
        Let’s pretend we are ... never mind,
        _Brother, thy tail hangs down behind!_
        This is the way of the Monkey-kind.

     _Then join our leaping lines that scumfish through the pines,
     That rocket by where, light and high, the wild grape swings.
     By the rubbish in our wake, and the noble noise we make,
     Be sure, be sure, we’re going to do some splendid things!_




“Tiger! Tiger!”

     What of the hunting, hunter bold?
        Brother, the watch was long and cold.
     What of the quarry ye went to kill?
        Brother, he crops in the jungle still.
     Where is the power that made your pride?
        Brother, it ebbs from my flank and side.
     Where is the haste that ye hurry by?
        Brother, I go to my lair--to die.

Now we must go ba