g made thus welcome,
and said “May Jove, sir, and the rest of the gods grant you your
heart’s desire in return for the kind way in which you have received
me.”

To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, “Stranger, though a still
poorer man should come here, it would not be right for me to insult
him, for all strangers and beggars are from Jove. You must take what
you can get and be thankful, for servants live in fear when they have
young lords for their masters; and this is my misfortune now, for
heaven has hindered the return of him who would have been always good
to me and given me something of my own—a house, a piece of land, a good
looking wife, and all else that a liberal master allows a servant who
has worked hard for him, and whose labour the gods have prospered as
they have mine in the situation which I hold. If my master had grown
old here he would have done great things by me, but he is gone, and I
wish that Helen’s whole race were utterly destroyed, for she has been
the death of many a good man. It was this matter that took my master to
Ilius, the land of noble steeds, to fight the Trojans in the cause of
king Agamemnon.”

As he spoke he bound his girdle round him and went to the styes where
the young sucking pigs were penned. He picked out two which he brought
back with him and sacrificed. He singed them, cut them up, and spitted
them; when the meat was cooked he brought it all in and set it before
Ulysses, hot and still on the spit, whereon Ulysses sprinkled it over
with white barley meal. The swineherd then mixed wine in a bowl of
ivy-wood, and taking a seat opposite Ulysses told him to begin.

“Fall to, stranger,” said he, “on a dish of servant’s pork. The fat
pigs have to go to the suitors, who eat them up without shame or
scruple; but the blessed gods love not such shameful doings, and
respect those who do what is lawful and right. Even the fierce
freebooters who go raiding on other people’s land, and Jove gives them
their spoil—even they, when they have filled their ships and got home
again live conscience-stricken, and look fearfully for judgement; but
some god seems to have told these people that Ulysses is dead and gone;
they will not, therefore, go back to their own homes and make their
offers of marriage in the usual way, but waste his estate by force,
without fear or stint. Not a day or night comes out of heaven, but they
sacrifice not one victim nor two only, and they take the run of his
wine, for he was exceedingly rich. No other great man either in Ithaca
or on the mainland is as rich as he was; he had as much as twenty men
put together. I will tell you what he had. There are twelve herds of
cattle upon the main land, and as many flocks of sheep, there are also
twelve droves of pigs, while his own men and hired strangers feed him
twelve widely spreading herds of goats. Here in Ithaca he runs even
large flocks of goats on the far end of the island, and they are in the
charge of excellent goat herds. Each one of these sends the suitors the
best goat in the flock every day. As for myself, I am in charge of the
pigs that you see here, and I have to keep picking out the best I have
and sending it to them.”

This was his story, but Ulysses went on eating and drinking ravenously
without a word, brooding his revenge. When he had eaten enough and was
satisfied, the swineherd took the bowl from which he usually drank,
filled it with wine, and gave it to Ulysses, who was pleased, and said
as he took it in his hands, “My friend, who was this master of yours
that bought you and paid for you, so rich and so powerful as you tell
me? You say he perished in the cause of King Agamemnon; tell me who he
was, in case I may have met with such a person. Jove and the other gods
know, but I may be able to give you news of him, for I have travelled
much.”

Eumaeus answered, “Old man, no traveller who comes here with news will
get Ulysses’ wife and son to believ