er ventured to believe I
should see, presented himself at the prison doors, saying he understood
one of the prisoners wished to speak to him; he added, that having
learned at Marseilles the particulars of my imprisonment, he hastened
to comply with my desire.

“You may easily imagine with what eagerness I welcomed him, and how
minutely I related the whole of what I had seen and heard. I felt some
degree of nervousness as I entered upon the history of the diamond,
but, to my inexpressible astonishment, he confirmed it in every
particular, and to my equal surprise, he seemed to place entire belief
in all I said.

“And then it was that, won by his mild charity, seeing that he was
acquainted with all the habits and customs of my own country, and
considering also that pardon for the only crime of which I was really
guilty might come with a double power from lips so benevolent and kind,
I besought him to receive my confession, under the seal of which I
recounted the Auteuil affair in all its details, as well as every other
transaction of my life. That which I had done by the impulse of my best
feelings produced the same effect as though it had been the result of
calculation. My voluntary confession of the assassination at Auteuil
proved to him that I had not committed that of which I stood accused.
When he quitted me, he bade me be of good courage, and to rely upon his
doing all in his power to convince my judges of my innocence.

“I had speedy proofs that the excellent abbé was engaged in my behalf,
for the rigors of my imprisonment were alleviated by many trifling
though acceptable indulgences, and I was told that my trial was to be
postponed to the assizes following those now being held.

“In the interim it pleased Providence to cause the apprehension of
Caderousse, who was discovered in some distant country, and brought
back to France, where he made a full confession, refusing to make the
fact of his wife’s having suggested and arranged the murder any excuse
for his own guilt. The wretched man was sentenced to the galleys for
life, and I was immediately set at liberty.”

“And then it was, I presume,” said Monte Cristo “that you came to me as
the bearer of a letter from the Abbé Busoni?”

“It was, your excellency; the benevolent abbé took an evident interest
in all that concerned me.

“‘Your mode of life as a smuggler,’ said he to me one day, ‘will be the
ruin of you; if you get out, don’t take it up again.’

“‘But how,’ inquired I, ‘am I to maintain myself and my poor sister?’

“‘A person, whose confessor I am,’ replied he, ‘and who entertains a
high regard for me, applied to me a short time since to procure him a
confidential servant. Would you like such a post? If so, I will give
you a letter of introduction to him.’

“‘Oh, father,’ I exclaimed, ‘you are very good.’

“‘But you must swear solemnly that I shall never have reason to repent
my recommendation.’

“I extended my hand, and was about to pledge myself by any promise he
would dictate, but he stopped me.

“‘It is unnecessary for you to bind yourself by any vow,’ said he; ‘I
know and admire the Corsican nature too well to fear you. Here, take
this,’ continued he, after rapidly writing the few lines I brought to
your excellency, and upon receipt of which you deigned to receive me
into your service, and proudly I ask whether your excellency has ever
had cause to repent having done so?”

“No,” replied the count; “I take pleasure in saying that you have
served me faithfully, Bertuccio; but you might have shown more
confidence in me.”

“I, your excellency?”

“Yes; you. How comes it, that having both a sister and an adopted son,
you have never spoken to me of either?”

20323m



“Alas, I have still to recount the most distressing period of my life.
Anxious as you may suppose I was to behold and comfort my dear sister,
I lost no time in hastening to Corsica, but when I arrived at Rogliano
I found