
“Such is really the case, I assure you, upon my honor! Baptiste, give
me yesterday’s paper,” cried Beauchamp.

“Here, I have brought mine with me,” replied Albert.

Beauchamp took the paper, and read the article to which Albert pointed
in an undertone.

“You see it is a serious annoyance,” said Morcerf, when Beauchamp had
finished the perusal of the paragraph.

“Is the officer referred to a relation of yours, then?” demanded the
journalist.

“Yes,” said Albert, blushing.

“Well, what do you wish me to do for you?” said Beauchamp mildly.

“My dear Beauchamp, I wish you to contradict this statement.” Beauchamp
looked at Albert with a benevolent expression.

“Come,” said he, “this matter will want a good deal of talking over; a
retractation is always a serious thing, you know. Sit down, and I will
read it again.”

Albert resumed his seat, and Beauchamp read, with more attention than
at first, the lines denounced by his friend.

“Well,” said Albert in a determined tone, “you see that your paper has
insulted a member of my family, and I insist on a retractation being
made.”

“You insist?”

“Yes, I insist.”

“Permit me to remind you that you are not in the Chamber, my dear
viscount.”

“Nor do I wish to be there,” replied the young man, rising. “I repeat
that I am determined to have the announcement of yesterday
contradicted. You have known me long enough,” continued Albert, biting
his lips convulsively, for he saw that Beauchamp’s anger was beginning
to rise,—“you have been my friend, and therefore sufficiently intimate
with me to be aware that I am likely to maintain my resolution on this
point.”

“If I have been your friend, Morcerf, your present manner of speaking
would almost lead me to forget that I ever bore that title. But wait a
moment, do not let us get angry, or at least not yet. You are irritated
and vexed—tell me how this Fernand is related to you?”

“He is merely my father,” said Albert—“M. Fernand Mondego, Count of
Morcerf, an old soldier who has fought in twenty battles and whose
honorable scars they would denounce as badges of disgrace.”

“Is it your father?” said Beauchamp; “that is quite another thing. Then
I can well understand your indignation, my dear Albert. I will look at
it again;” and he read the paragraph for the third time, laying a
stress on each word as he proceeded. “But the paper nowhere identifies
this Fernand with your father.”

40100m



“No; but the connection will be seen by others, and therefore I will
have the article contradicted.”

At the words _I will_, Beauchamp steadily raised his eyes to Albert’s
countenance, and then as gradually lowering them, he remained
thoughtful for a few moments.

“You will retract this assertion, will you not, Beauchamp?” said Albert
with increased though stifled anger.

“Yes,” replied Beauchamp.

“Immediately?” said Albert.

“When I am convinced that the statement is false.”

“What?”

“The thing is worth looking into, and I will take pains to investigate
the matter thoroughly.”

“But what is there to investigate, sir?” said Albert, enraged beyond
measure at Beauchamp’s last remark. “If you do not believe that it is
my father, say so immediately; and if, on the contrary, you believe it
to be him, state your reasons for doing so.”

Beauchamp looked at Albert with the smile which was so peculiar to him,
and which in its numerous modifications served to express every varied
emotion of his mind.

“Sir,” replied he, “if you came to me with the idea of demanding
satisfaction, you should have gone at once to the point, and not have
entertained me with the idle conversation to which I have been
patiently listening for the last half hour. Am I to put this
construction on your visit?”

“Yes, if you will not consent to retract that infamous calumny.”

“Wait a moment—no threats, if you please, M. Fernand Mondego, Vicomte
de Morcerf; I never allow them from my enemies, and 