o break, and Menelaus, who had already risen,
leaving Helen in bed, came towards them. When Telemachus saw him he put
on his shirt as fast as he could, threw a great cloak over his
shoulders, and went out to meet him. “Menelaus,” said he, “let me go
back now to my own country, for I want to get home.”

And Menelaus answered, “Telemachus, if you insist on going I will not
detain you. I do not like to see a host either too fond of his guest or
too rude to him. Moderation is best in all things, and not letting a
man go when he wants to do so is as bad as telling him to go if he
would like to stay. One should treat a guest well as long as he is in
the house and speed him when he wants to leave it. Wait, then, till I
can get your beautiful presents into your chariot, and till you have
yourself seen them. I will tell the women to prepare a sufficient
dinner for you of what there may be in the house; it will be at once
more proper and cheaper for you to get your dinner before setting out
on such a long journey. If, moreover, you have a fancy for making a
tour in Hellas or in the Peloponnese, I will yoke my horses, and will
conduct you myself through all our principal cities. No one will send
us away empty handed; every one will give us something—a bronze tripod,
a couple of mules, or a gold cup.”

“Menelaus,” replied Telemachus, “I want to go home at once, for when I
came away I left my property without protection, and fear that while
looking for my father I shall come to ruin myself, or find that
something valuable has been stolen during my absence.”

When Menelaus heard this he immediately told his wife and servants to
prepare a sufficient dinner from what there might be in the house. At
this moment Eteoneus joined him, for he lived close by and had just got
up; so Menelaus told him to light the fire and cook some meat, which he
at once did. Then Menelaus went down into his fragrant store room,130
not alone, but Helen went too, with Megapenthes. When he reached the
place where the treasures of his house were kept, he selected a double
cup, and told his son Megapenthes to bring also a silver mixing bowl.
Meanwhile Helen went to the chest where she kept the lovely dresses
which she had made with her own hands, and took out one that was
largest and most beautifully enriched with embroidery; it glittered
like a star, and lay at the very bottom of the chest. 131 Then they all
came back through the house again till they got to Telemachus, and
Menelaus said, “Telemachus, may Jove, the mighty husband of Juno, bring
you safely home according to your desire. I will now present you with
the finest and most precious piece of plate in all my house. It is a
mixing bowl of pure silver, except the rim, which is inlaid with gold,
and it is the work of Vulcan. Phaedimus king of the Sidonians made me a
present of it in the course of a visit that I paid him while I was on
my return home. I should like to give it to you.”

With these words he placed the double cup in the hands of Telemachus,
while Megapenthes brought the beautiful mixing bowl and set it before
him. Hard by stood lovely Helen with the robe ready in her hand.

“I too, my son,” said she, “have something for you as a keepsake from
the hand of Helen; it is for your bride to wear upon her wedding day.
Till then, get your dear mother to keep it for you; thus may you go
back rejoicing to your own country and to your home.”

So saying she gave the robe over to him and he received it gladly. Then
Pisistratus put the presents into the chariot, and admired them all as
he did so. Presently Menelaus took Telemachus and Pisistratus into the
house, and they both of them sat down to table. A maid servant brought
them water in a beautiful golden ewer, and poured it into a silver
basin for them to wash their hands, and she drew a clean table beside
them; an upper servant brought them bread and offered them many good
things of what there was 