ring embers threw up a fresh flame from the
kindling of a piece of wood that lay near, and a bright light flashed
over the room. La Carconte still kept her eyes fixed on her husband,
but as he made no sign of changing his position, she extended her hard,
bony hand, and touched him on the forehead.

20317m



“Caderousse shuddered. The woman’s lips seemed to move, as though she
were talking; but because she merely spoke in an undertone, or my
senses were dulled by sleep, I did not catch a word she uttered.
Confused sights and sounds seemed to float before me, and gradually I
fell into a deep, heavy slumber. How long I had been in this
unconscious state I know not, when I was suddenly aroused by the report
of a pistol, followed by a fearful cry. Weak and tottering footsteps
resounded across the chamber above me, and the next instant a dull,
heavy weight seemed to fall powerless on the staircase. I had not yet
fully recovered consciousness, when again I heard groans, mingled with
half-stifled cries, as if from persons engaged in a deadly struggle. A
cry more prolonged than the others and ending in a series of groans
effectually roused me from my drowsy lethargy. Hastily raising myself
on one arm, I looked around, but all was dark; and it seemed to me as
if the rain must have penetrated through the flooring of the room
above, for some kind of moisture appeared to fall, drop by drop, upon
my forehead, and when I passed my hand across my brow, I felt that it
was wet and clammy.

“To the fearful noises that had awakened me had succeeded the most
perfect silence—unbroken, save by the footsteps of a man walking about
in the chamber above. The staircase creaked, he descended into the room
below, approached the fire and lit a candle.

“The man was Caderousse—he was pale and his shirt was all bloody.
Having obtained the light, he hurried upstairs again, and once more I
heard his rapid and uneasy footsteps.

“A moment later he came down again, holding in his hand the small
shagreen case, which he opened, to assure himself it contained the
diamond,—seemed to hesitate as to which pocket he should put it in,
then, as if dissatisfied with the security of either pocket, he
deposited it in his red handkerchief, which he carefully rolled round
his head.

“After this he took from his cupboard the bank-notes and gold he had
put there, thrust the one into the pocket of his trousers, and the
other into that of his waistcoat, hastily tied up a small bundle of
linen, and rushing towards the door, disappeared in the darkness of the
night.

“Then all became clear and manifest to me, and I reproached myself with
what had happened, as though I myself had done the guilty deed. I
fancied that I still heard faint moans, and imagining that the
unfortunate jeweller might not be quite dead, I determined to go to his
relief, by way of atoning in some slight degree, not for the crime I
had committed, but for that which I had not endeavored to prevent. For
this purpose I applied all the strength I possessed to force an
entrance from the cramped spot in which I lay to the adjoining room.
The poorly fastened boards which alone divided me from it yielded to my
efforts, and I found myself in the house. Hastily snatching up the
lighted candle, I hurried to the staircase; about midway a body was
lying quite across the stairs. It was that of La Carconte. The pistol I
had heard had doubtless been fired at her. The shot had frightfully
lacerated her throat, leaving two gaping wounds from which, as well as
the mouth, the blood was pouring in floods. She was stone dead. I
strode past her, and ascended to the sleeping chamber, which presented
an appearance of the wildest disorder. The furniture had been knocked
over in the deadly struggle that had taken place there, and the sheets,
to which the unfortunate jeweller had doubtless clung, were dragged
across the room. The murdered man lay on the floor, his head