ie. The pistol
fell from his hands.

“My father!” cried the young girl, out of breath, and half dead with
joy—“saved, you are saved!” And she threw herself into his arms,
holding in her extended hand a red, netted silk purse.

20061m



“Saved, my child!” said Morrel; “what do you mean?”

“Yes, saved—saved! See, see!” said the young girl.

Morrel took the purse, and started as he did so, for a vague
remembrance reminded him that it once belonged to himself. At one end
was the receipted bill for the 287,000 francs, and at the other was a
diamond as large as a hazel-nut, with these words on a small slip of
parchment: _Julie’s Dowry_.

Morrel passed his hand over his brow; it seemed to him a dream. At this
moment the clock struck eleven. He felt as if each stroke of the hammer
fell upon his heart.

“Explain, my child,” he said, “Explain, my child,” he said,
“explain—where did you find this purse?”

“In a house in the Allées de Meilhan, No. 15, on the corner of a
mantelpiece in a small room on the fifth floor.”

“But,” cried Morrel, “this purse is not yours!” Julie handed to her
father the letter she had received in the morning.

“And did you go alone?” asked Morrel, after he had read it.

“Emmanuel accompanied me, father. He was to have waited for me at the
corner of the Rue du Musée, but, strange to say, he was not there when
I returned.”

“Monsieur Morrel!” exclaimed a voice on the stairs; “Monsieur Morrel!”

“It is his voice!” said Julie. At this moment Emmanuel entered, his
countenance full of animation and joy.

“The _Pharaon_!” he cried; “the _Pharaon_!”

“What!—what!—the _Pharaon_! Are you mad, Emmanuel? You know the vessel
is lost.”

“The _Pharaon_, sir—they signal the _Pharaon_! The _Pharaon_ is
entering the harbor!”

Morrel fell back in his chair, his strength was failing him; his
understanding weakened by such events, refused to comprehend such
incredible, unheard-of, fabulous facts. But his son came in.

“Father,” cried Maximilian, “how could you say the _Pharaon_ was lost?
The lookout has signalled her, and they say she is now coming into
port.”

20063m



“My dear friends,” said Morrel, “if this be so, it must be a miracle of
heaven! Impossible, impossible!”

But what was real and not less incredible was the purse he held in his
hand, the acceptance receipted—the splendid diamond.

“Ah, sir,” exclaimed Cocles, “what can it mean?—the _Pharaon_?”

“Come, dear ones,” said Morrel, rising from his seat, “let us go and
see, and Heaven have pity upon us if it be false intelligence!”

They all went out, and on the stairs met Madame Morrel, who had been
afraid to go up into the study. In a moment they were at the Canebière.
There was a crowd on the pier. All the crowd gave way before Morrel.
“The _Pharaon_! the _Pharaon_!” said every voice.

And, wonderful to see, in front of the tower of Saint-Jean, was a ship
bearing on her stern these words, printed in white letters, “The
_Pharaon_, Morrel & Son, of Marseilles.” She was the exact duplicate of
the other _Pharaon_, and loaded, as that had been, with cochineal and
indigo. She cast anchor, clued up sails, and on the deck was Captain
Gaumard giving orders, and good old Penelon making signals to M.
Morrel. To doubt any longer was impossible; there was the evidence of
the senses, and ten thousand persons who came to corroborate the
testimony.

As Morrel and his son embraced on the pier-head, in the presence and
amid the applause of the whole city witnessing this event, a man, with
his face half-covered by a black beard, and who, concealed behind the
sentry-box, watched the scene with delight, uttered these words in a
low tone:

“Be happy, noble heart, be blessed for all the good thou hast done and
wilt do hereafter, and let my gratitude remain in obscurity like your
good deeds.”

20064m



And with a smile expressive of supreme content, he left his
hiding-place, and without 