y no means; it really seems to me
very curious.”

“Yes, indeed. So, sir, you wish to see all relating to the poor abbé,
who really was gentleness itself.”

“Yes, you will much oblige me.”

“Go into my study here, and I will show it to you.”

And they both entered M. de Boville’s study. Everything was here
arranged in perfect order; each register had its number, each file of
papers its place. The inspector begged the Englishman to seat himself
in an armchair, and placed before him the register and documents
relative to the Château d’If, giving him all the time he desired for
the examination, while De Boville seated himself in a corner, and began
to read his newspaper. The Englishman easily found the entries relative
to the Abbé Faria; but it seemed that the history which the inspector
had related interested him greatly, for after having perused the first
documents he turned over the leaves until he reached the deposition
respecting Edmond Dantès. There he found everything arranged in due
order,—the accusation, examination, Morrel’s petition, M. de
Villefort’s marginal notes. He folded up the accusation quietly, and
put it as quietly in his pocket; read the examination, and saw that the
name of Noirtier was not mentioned in it; perused, too, the application
dated 10th April, 1815, in which Morrel, by the deputy procureur’s
advice, exaggerated with the best intentions (for Napoleon was then on
the throne) the services Dantès had rendered to the imperial
cause—services which Villefort’s certificates rendered indisputable.
Then he saw through the whole thing. This petition to Napoleon, kept
back by Villefort, had become, under the second restoration, a terrible
weapon against him in the hands of the king’s attorney. He was no
longer astonished when he searched on to find in the register this
note, placed in a bracket against his name:

Edmond Dantès.

An inveterate Bonapartist; took an active part in the return from the
Island of Elba.

To be kept in strict solitary confinement, and to be closely watched
and guarded.

Beneath these lines was written in another hand: “See note
above—nothing can be done.”

He compared the writing in the bracket with the writing of the
certificate placed beneath Morrel’s petition, and discovered that the
note in the bracket was the same writing as the certificate—that is to
say, was in Villefort’s handwriting.

20029m



As to the note which accompanied this, the Englishman understood that
it might have been added by some inspector who had taken a momentary
interest in Dantès’ situation, but who had, from the remarks we have
quoted, found it impossible to give any effect to the interest he had
felt.

As we have said, the inspector, from discretion, and that he might not
disturb the Abbé Faria’s pupil in his researches, had seated himself in
a corner, and was reading _Le Drapeau Blanc_. He did not see the
Englishman fold up and place in his pocket the accusation written by
Danglars under the arbor of La Réserve, and which had the postmark,
“Marseilles, 27th February, delivery 6 o’clock, P.M.”

But it must be said that if he had seen it, he attached so little
importance to this scrap of paper, and so much importance to his two
hundred thousand francs, that he would not have opposed whatever the
Englishman might do, however irregular it might be.

“Thanks,” said the latter, closing the register with a slam, “I have
all I want; now it is for me to perform my promise. Give me a simple
assignment of your debt; acknowledge therein the receipt of the cash,
and I will hand you over the money.”

He rose, gave his seat to M. de Boville, who took it without ceremony,
and quickly drew up the required assignment, while the Englishman
counted out the bank-notes on the other side of the desk.



 Chapter 29. The House of Morrel & Son

Anyone who had quitted Marseilles a few years previously, well
acquainted with the interior of Mor