ll reply that he does not know anything
about it.”

This postscript decreased greatly the young girl’s happiness. Was there
nothing to fear? was there not some snare laid for her? Her innocence
had kept her in ignorance of the dangers that might assail a young girl
of her age. But there is no need to know danger in order to fear it;
indeed, it may be observed, that it is usually unknown perils that
inspire the greatest terror.

Julie hesitated, and resolved to take counsel. Yet, through a singular
impulse, it was neither to her mother nor her brother that she applied,
but to Emmanuel. She hastened down and told him what had occurred on
the day when the agent of Thomson & French had come to her father’s,
related the scene on the staircase, repeated the promise she had made,
and showed him the letter.

“You must go, then, mademoiselle,” said Emmanuel.

“Go there?” murmured Julie.

“Yes; I will accompany you.”

“But did you not read that I must be alone?” said Julie.

“And you shall be alone,” replied the young man. “I will await you at
the corner of the Rue du Musée, and if you are so long absent as to
make me uneasy, I will hasten to rejoin you, and woe to him of whom you
shall have cause to complain to me!”

“Then, Emmanuel?” said the young girl with hesitation, “it is your
opinion that I should obey this invitation?”

“Yes. Did not the messenger say your father’s safety depended upon it?”

“But what danger threatens him, then, Emmanuel?” she asked.

Emmanuel hesitated a moment, but his desire to make Julie decide
immediately made him reply.

“Listen,” he said; “today is the 5th of September, is it not?”

“Yes.”

“Today, then, at eleven o’clock, your father has nearly three hundred
thousand francs to pay?”

“Yes, we know that.”

“Well, then,” continued Emmanuel, “we have not fifteen thousand francs
in the house.”

“What will happen then?”

“Why, if today before eleven o’clock your father has not found someone
who will come to his aid, he will be compelled at twelve o’clock to
declare himself a bankrupt.”

“Oh, come, then, come!” cried she, hastening away with the young man.

During this time, Madame Morrel had told her son everything. The young
man knew quite well that, after the succession of misfortunes which had
befallen his father, great changes had taken place in the style of
living and housekeeping; but he did not know that matters had reached
such a point. He was thunderstruck. Then, rushing hastily out of the
apartment, he ran upstairs, expecting to find his father in his study,
but he rapped there in vain.

While he was yet at the door of the study he heard the bedroom door
open, turned, and saw his father. Instead of going direct to his study,
M. Morrel had returned to his bedchamber, which he was only this moment
quitting. Morrel uttered a cry of surprise at the sight of his son, of
whose arrival he was ignorant. He remained motionless on the spot,
pressing with his left hand something he had concealed under his coat.
Maximilian sprang down the staircase, and threw his arms round his
father’s neck; but suddenly he recoiled, and placed his right hand on
Morrel’s breast.

“Father,” he exclaimed, turning pale as death, “what are you going to
do with that brace of pistols under your coat?”

“Oh, this is what I feared!” said Morrel.

“Father, father, in Heaven’s name,” exclaimed the young man, “what are
these weapons for?”

“Maximilian,” replied Morrel, looking fixedly at his son, “you are a
man, and a man of honor. Come, and I will explain to you.”

And with a firm step Morrel went up to his study, while Maximilian
followed him, trembling as he went. Morrel opened the door, and closed
it behind his son; then, crossing the anteroom, went to his desk on
which he placed the pistols, and pointed with his finger to an open
ledger. In this ledger was made out an exact balance-sheet of his
affairs. Morrel had to pay, within half an ho