tract always
injures the lady more than the gentleman.”

“Enough, sir,” said Morcerf, “we will speak no more on the subject.”

And clutching his gloves in anger, he left the apartment. Danglars
observed that during the whole conversation Morcerf had never once
dared to ask if it was on his own account that Danglars recalled his
word.

That evening he had a long conference with several friends; and M.
Cavalcanti, who had remained in the drawing-room with the ladies, was
the last to leave the banker’s house.

The next morning, as soon as he awoke, Danglars asked for the
newspapers; they were brought to him; he laid aside three or four, and
at last fixed on _l’Impartial_, the paper of which Beauchamp was the
chief editor. He hastily tore off the cover, opened the journal with
nervous precipitation, passed contemptuously over the Paris jottings,
and arriving at the miscellaneous intelligence, stopped with a
malicious smile, at a paragraph headed

_We hear from Yanina._


“Very good,” observed Danglars, after having read the paragraph; “here
is a little article on Colonel Fernand, which, if I am not mistaken,
would render the explanation which the Comte de Morcerf required of me
perfectly unnecessary.”

At the same moment, that is, at nine o’clock in the morning, Albert de
Morcerf, dressed in a black coat buttoned up to his chin, might have
been seen walking with a quick and agitated step in the direction of
Monte Cristo’s house in the Champs-Élysées. When he presented himself
at the gate the porter informed him that the Count had gone out about
half an hour previously.

“Did he take Baptistin with him?”

“No, my lord.”

“Call him, then; I wish to speak to him.”

The concierge went to seek the valet de chambre, and returned with him
in an instant.

“My good friend,” said Albert, “I beg pardon for my intrusion, but I
was anxious to know from your own mouth if your master was really out
or not.”

“He is really out, sir,” replied Baptistin.

“Out, even to me?”

“I know how happy my master always is to receive the vicomte,” said
Baptistin; “and I should therefore never think of including him in any
general order.”

“You are right; and now I wish to see him on an affair of great
importance. Do you think it will be long before he comes in?”

“No, I think not, for he ordered his breakfast at ten o’clock.”

“Well, I will go and take a turn in the Champs-Élysées, and at ten
o’clock I will return here; meanwhile, if the count should come in,
will you beg him not to go out again without seeing me?”

“You may depend on my doing so, sir,” said Baptistin.

Albert left the cab in which he had come at the count’s door, intending
to take a turn on foot. As he was passing the Allée des Veuves, he
thought he saw the count’s horses standing at Gosset’s
shooting-gallery; he approached, and soon recognized the coachman.

“Is the count shooting in the gallery?” said Morcerf.

“Yes, sir,” replied the coachman. While he was speaking, Albert had
heard the report of two or three pistol-shots. He entered, and on his
way met the waiter.

“Excuse me, my lord,” said the lad; “but will you have the kindness to
wait a moment?”

“What for, Philip?” asked Albert, who, being a constant visitor there,
did not understand this opposition to his entrance.

“Because the person who is now in the gallery prefers being alone, and
never practices in the presence of anyone.”

“Not even before you, Philip? Then who loads his pistol?”

“His servant.”

“A Nubian?”

“A negro.”

“It is he, then.”

“Do you know this gentleman?”

“Yes, and I am come to look for him; he is a friend of mine.”

“Oh, that is quite another thing, then. I will go immediately and
inform him of your arrival.”

And Philip, urged by his own curiosity, entered the gallery; a second
afterwards, Monte Cristo appeared on the threshold.

“I ask your pardon, my dear count,” said Albert, “for following you
he