gain to ramble, to talk again and again of
the past! But what is the use of teasing me with going all over that
again?”

“Ah, you are only one-and-twenty, and can forget the past; I am fifty,
and am obliged to recollect it. But let us return to business.”

“Yes.”

“I was going to say, if I were in your place——”

“Well.”

“I would realize——”

“How would you realize?”

“I would ask for six months’ in advance, under pretence of being able
to purchase a farm, then with my six months I would decamp.”

“Well, well,” said Andrea, “that isn’t a bad idea.”

“My dear friend,” said Caderousse, “eat of my bread, and take my
advice; you will be none the worse off, physically or morally.”

“But,” said Andrea, “why do you not act on the advice you gave me? Why
do you not realize a six months’, a year’s advance even, and retire to
Brussels? Instead of living the retired baker, you might live as a
bankrupt, using his privileges; that would be very good.”

“But how the devil would you have me retire on twelve hundred francs?”

“Ah, Caderousse,” said Andrea, “how covetous you are! Two months ago
you were dying with hunger.”

“The appetite grows by what it feeds on,” said Caderousse, grinning and
showing his teeth, like a monkey laughing or a tiger growling. “And,”
added he, biting off with his large white teeth an enormous mouthful of
bread, “I have formed a plan.”

Caderousse’s plans alarmed Andrea still more than his ideas; ideas were
but the germ, the plan was reality.

“Let me see your plan; I dare say it is a pretty one.”

“Why not? Who formed the plan by which we left the establishment of
M——! eh? was it not I? and it was no bad one I believe, since here we
are!”

“I do not say,” replied Andrea, “that you never make a good one; but
let us see your plan.”

“Well,” pursued Caderousse, “can you without expending one sou, put me
in the way of getting fifteen thousand francs? No, fifteen thousand are
not enough,—I cannot again become an honest man with less than thirty
thousand francs.”

“No,” replied Andrea, dryly, “no, I cannot.”

“I do not think you understand me,” replied Caderousse, calmly; “I said
without your laying out a sou.”

“Do you want me to commit a robbery, to spoil all my good fortune—and
yours with mine—and both of us to be dragged down there again?”

“It would make very little difference to me,” said Caderousse, “if I
were retaken, I am a poor creature to live alone, and sometimes pine
for my old comrades; not like you, heartless creature, who would be
glad never to see them again.”

Andrea did more than tremble this time, he turned pale.

“Come, Caderousse, no nonsense!” said he.

“Don’t alarm yourself, my little Benedetto, but just point out to me
some means of gaining those thirty thousand francs without your
assistance, and I will contrive it.”

“Well, I’ll see—I’ll try to contrive some way,” said Andrea.

“Meanwhile you will raise my monthly allowance to five hundred francs,
my little fellow? I have a fancy, and mean to get a housekeeper.”

“Well, you shall have your five hundred francs,” said Andrea; “but it
is very hard for me, my poor Caderousse—you take advantage——”

“Bah,” said Caderousse, “when you have access to countless stores.”

One would have said Andrea anticipated his companion’s words, so did
his eye flash like lightning, but it was but for a moment.

“True,” he replied, “and my protector is very kind.”

“That dear protector,” said Caderousse; “and how much does he give you
monthly?”

“Five thousand francs.”

“As many thousands as you give me hundreds! Truly, it is only bastards
who are thus fortunate. Five thousand francs per month! What the devil
can you do with all that?”

“Oh, it is no trouble to spend that; and I am like you, I want
capital.”

“Capital?—yes—I understand—everyone would like capital.”

“Well, and I shall get it.”

“Who will give it to you—your prince?”

“Yes, my prince. But unfor