sible,” interrupted Albert, “it is only to keep up
the mystery; for whom do you take the blue domino at the window with
the white curtains?”

“Where was this window with white hangings?” asked the countess.

“At the Rospoli Palace.”

“The count had three windows at the Rospoli Palace?”

“Yes. Did you pass through the Corso?”

“Yes.”

“Well, did you notice two windows hung with yellow damask, and one with
white damask with a red cross? Those were the count’s windows.”

“Why, he must be a nabob. Do you know what those three windows were
worth?”

“Two or three hundred Roman crowns?”

“Two or three thousand.”

“The deuce!”

“Does his island produce him such a revenue?”

“It does not bring him a bajocco.”

“Then why did he purchase it?”

“For a whim.”

“He is an original, then?”

“In reality,” observed Albert, “he seemed to me somewhat eccentric;
were he at Paris, and a frequenter of the theatres, I should say he was
a poor devil literally mad. This morning he made two or three exits
worthy of Didier or Anthony.”

At this moment a fresh visitor entered, and, according to custom, Franz
gave up his seat to him. This circumstance had, moreover, the effect of
changing the conversation; an hour afterwards the two friends returned
to their hotel.

Signor Pastrini had already set about procuring their disguises for the
morrow; and he assured them that they would be perfectly satisfied. The
next morning, at nine o’clock, he entered Franz’s room, followed by a
tailor, who had eight or ten Roman peasant costumes on his arm; they
selected two exactly alike, and charged the tailor to sew on each of
their hats about twenty yards of ribbon, and to procure them two of the
long silk sashes of different colors with which the lower orders
decorate themselves on fête days.

Albert was impatient to see how he looked in his new dress—a jacket and
breeches of blue velvet, silk stockings with clocks, shoes with
buckles, and a silk waistcoat. This picturesque attire set him off to
great advantage; and when he had bound the scarf around his waist, and
when his hat, placed coquettishly on one side, let fall on his shoulder
a stream of ribbons, Franz was forced to confess that costume has much
to do with the physical superiority we accord to certain nations. The
Turks used to be so picturesque with their long and flowing robes, but
are they not now hideous with their blue frocks buttoned up to the
chin, and their red caps, which make them look like a bottle of wine
with a red seal? Franz complimented Albert, who looked at himself in
the glass with an unequivocal smile of satisfaction. They were thus
engaged when the Count of Monte Cristo entered.

20185m



“Gentlemen,” said he, “although a companion is agreeable, perfect
freedom is sometimes still more agreeable. I come to say that today,
and for the remainder of the Carnival, I leave the carriage entirely at
your disposal. The host will tell you I have three or four more, so
that you will not inconvenience me in any way. Make use of it, I pray
you, for your pleasure or your business.”

The young men wished to decline, but they could find no good reason for
refusing an offer which was so agreeable to them. The Count of Monte
Cristo remained a quarter of an hour with them, conversing on all
subjects with the greatest ease. He was, as we have already said,
perfectly well acquainted with the literature of all countries. A
glance at the walls of his salon proved to Franz and Albert that he was
a connoisseur of pictures. A few words he let fall showed them that he
was no stranger to the sciences, and he seemed much occupied with
chemistry. The two friends did not venture to return the count the
breakfast he had given them; it would have been too absurd to offer him
in exchange for his excellent table the very inferior one of Signor
Pastrini. They told him so frankly, and he received their excuses with
the air of a man who