 to act, so what does it matter if she plays Juliet like
a wooden doll? She is very lovely, and if she knows as little about
life as she does about acting, she will be a delightful experience.
There are only two kinds of people who are really fascinating—people
who know absolutely everything, and people who know absolutely nothing.
Good heavens, my dear boy, don’t look so tragic! The secret of
remaining young is never to have an emotion that is unbecoming. Come to
the club with Basil and myself. We will smoke cigarettes and drink to
the beauty of Sibyl Vane. She is beautiful. What more can you want?”

“Go away, Harry,” cried the lad. “I want to be alone. Basil, you must
go. Ah! can’t you see that my heart is breaking?” The hot tears came to
his eyes. His lips trembled, and rushing to the back of the box, he
leaned up against the wall, hiding his face in his hands.

“Let us go, Basil,” said Lord Henry with a strange tenderness in his
voice, and the two young men passed out together.

A few moments afterwards the footlights flared up and the curtain rose
on the third act. Dorian Gray went back to his seat. He looked pale,
and proud, and indifferent. The play dragged on, and seemed
interminable. Half of the audience went out, tramping in heavy boots
and laughing. The whole thing was a _fiasco_. The last act was played
to almost empty benches. The curtain went down on a titter and some
groans.

As soon as it was over, Dorian Gray rushed behind the scenes into the
greenroom. The girl was standing there alone, with a look of triumph on
her face. Her eyes were lit with an exquisite fire. There was a
radiance about her. Her parted lips were smiling over some secret of
their own.

When he entered, she looked at him, and an expression of infinite joy
came over her. “How badly I acted to-night, Dorian!” she cried.

“Horribly!” he answered, gazing at her in amazement. “Horribly! It was
dreadful. Are you ill? You have no idea what it was. You have no idea
what I suffered.”

The girl smiled. “Dorian,” she answered, lingering over his name with
long-drawn music in her voice, as though it were sweeter than honey to
the red petals of her mouth. “Dorian, you should have understood. But
you understand now, don’t you?”

“Understand what?” he asked, angrily.

“Why I was so bad to-night. Why I shall always be bad. Why I shall
never act well again.”

He shrugged his shoulders. “You are ill, I suppose. When you are ill
you shouldn’t act. You make yourself ridiculous. My friends were bored.
I was bored.”

She seemed not to listen to him. She was transfigured with joy. An
ecstasy of happiness dominated her.

“Dorian, Dorian,” she cried, “before I knew you, acting was the one
reality of my life. It was only in the theatre that I lived. I thought
that it was all true. I was Rosalind one night and Portia the other.
The joy of Beatrice was my joy, and the sorrows of Cordelia were mine
also. I believed in everything. The common people who acted with me
seemed to me to be godlike. The painted scenes were my world. I knew
nothing but shadows, and I thought them real. You came—oh, my beautiful
love!—and you freed my soul from prison. You taught me what reality
really is. To-night, for the first time in my life, I saw through the
hollowness, the sham, the silliness of the empty pageant in which I had
always played. To-night, for the first time, I became conscious that
the Romeo was hideous, and old, and painted, that the moonlight in the
orchard was false, that the scenery was vulgar, and that the words I
had to speak were unreal, were not my words, were not what I wanted to
say. You had brought me something higher, something of which all art is
but a reflection. You had made me understand what love really is. My
love! My love! Prince Charming! Prince of life! I have grown sick of
shadows. You are more to me than all art can ever be. What have I to do
with the puppets of a play? When I ca