first moment when
the conversation became earnest to escape to her study, whence very
soon two cheerful and noisy voices being heard in connection with
occasional notes of the piano assured Monte Cristo that Mademoiselle
Danglars preferred to his society and to that of M. Cavalcanti the
company of Mademoiselle Louise d’Armilly, her singing teacher.

It was then, especially while conversing with Madame Danglars, and
apparently absorbed by the charm of the conversation, that the count
noticed M. Andrea Cavalcanti’s solicitude, his manner of listening to
the music at the door he dared not pass, and of manifesting his
admiration.

The banker soon returned. His first look was certainly directed towards
Monte Cristo, but the second was for Andrea. As for his wife, he bowed
to her, as some husbands do to their wives, but in a way that bachelors
will never comprehend, until a very extensive code is published on
conjugal life.

“Have not the ladies invited you to join them at the piano?” said
Danglars to Andrea.

“Alas, no, sir,” replied Andrea with a sigh, still more remarkable than
the former ones. Danglars immediately advanced towards the door and
opened it.

40050m



The two young ladies were seen seated on the same chair, at the piano,
accompanying themselves, each with one hand, a fancy to which they had
accustomed themselves, and performed admirably. Mademoiselle d’Armilly,
whom they then perceived through the open doorway, formed with Eugénie
one of the _tableaux vivants_ of which the Germans are so fond. She was
somewhat beautiful, and exquisitely formed—a little fairy-like figure,
with large curls falling on her neck, which was rather too long, as
Perugino sometimes makes his Virgins, and her eyes dull from fatigue.
She was said to have a weak chest, and like Antonia in the _Cremona
Violin_, she would die one day while singing.

Monte Cristo cast one rapid and curious glance round this sanctum; it
was the first time he had ever seen Mademoiselle d’Armilly, of whom he
had heard much.

“Well,” said the banker to his daughter, “are we then all to be
excluded?”

He then led the young man into the study, and either by chance or
manœuvre the door was partially closed after Andrea, so that from the
place where they sat neither the Count nor the baroness could see
anything; but as the banker had accompanied Andrea, Madame Danglars
appeared to take no notice of it.

The count soon heard Andrea’s voice, singing a Corsican song,
accompanied by the piano. While the count smiled at hearing this song,
which made him lose sight of Andrea in the recollection of Benedetto,
Madame Danglars was boasting to Monte Cristo of her husband’s strength
of mind, who that very morning had lost three or four hundred thousand
francs by a failure at Milan. The praise was well deserved, for had not
the count heard it from the baroness, or by one of those means by which
he knew everything, the baron’s countenance would not have led him to
suspect it.

“Hem,” thought Monte Cristo, “he begins to conceal his losses; a month
since he boasted of them.”

Then aloud,—“Oh, madame, M. Danglars is so skilful, he will soon regain
at the Bourse what he loses elsewhere.”

“I see that you participate in a prevalent error,” said Madame
Danglars.

“What is it?” said Monte Cristo.

“That M. Danglars speculates, whereas he never does.”

“Truly, madame, I recollect M. Debray told me——apropos, what has become
of him? I have seen nothing of him the last three or four days.”

“Nor I,” said Madame Danglars; “but you began a sentence, sir, and did
not finish.”

“Which?”

“M. Debray had told you——”

“Ah, yes; he told me it was you who sacrificed to the demon of
speculation.”

“I was once very fond of it, but I do not indulge now.”

“Then you are wrong, madame. Fortune is precarious; and if I were a
woman and fate had made me a banker’s wife, whatever might be my
confidence in my husband’s g