would choose to expose himself in
such a formidable Sahara.

Nevertheless, had Caderousse but retained his post a few minutes
longer, he might have caught a dim outline of something approaching
from the direction of Bellegarde; as the moving object drew nearer,
he would easily have perceived that it consisted of a man and horse,
between whom the kindest and most amiable understanding appeared
to exist. The horse was of Hungarian breed, and ambled along at an
easy pace. His rider was a priest, dressed in black, and wearing a
three-cornered hat; and, despite of the ardent rays of a noonday sun,
the pair came on with a fair degree of rapidity.

Having arrived before the Pont du Gard, the horse stopped, but whether
for his own pleasure or that of his rider would have been difficult to
say. However that might have been, the priest, dismounting, led his
steed by the bridle in search of some place to which he could secure
him. Availing himself of a handle that projected from a half-fallen
door, he tied the animal safely and having drawn a red cotton
handkerchief, from his pocket, wiped away the perspiration that
streamed from his brow, then, advancing to the door, struck thrice with
the end of his iron-shod stick.

At this unusual sound, a huge black dog came rushing to meet the daring
assailant of his ordinarily tranquil abode, snarling and displaying his
sharp white teeth with a determined hostility that abundantly proved
how little he was accustomed to society. At that moment a heavy
footstep was heard descending the wooden staircase that led from the
upper floor, and, with many bows and courteous smiles, the host of the
Pont du Gard besought his guest to enter.

0319m



“You are welcome, sir, most welcome!” repeated the astonished
Caderousse. “Now, then, Margotin,” cried he, speaking to the dog, “will
you be quiet? Pray don’t heed him, sir!—he only barks, he never bites.
I make no doubt a glass of good wine would be acceptable this
dreadfully hot day.” Then perceiving for the first time the garb of the
traveller he had to entertain, Caderousse hastily exclaimed: “A
thousand pardons! I really did not observe whom I had the honor to
receive under my poor roof. What would the abbé please to have? What
refreshment can I offer? All I have is at his service.”

The priest gazed on the person addressing him with a long and searching
gaze—there even seemed a disposition on his part to court a similar
scrutiny on the part of the innkeeper; then, observing in the
countenance of the latter no other expression than extreme surprise at
his own want of attention to an inquiry so courteously worded, he
deemed it as well to terminate this dumb show, and therefore said,
speaking with a strong Italian accent, “You are, I presume, M.
Caderousse?”

“Yes, sir,” answered the host, even more surprised at the question than
he had been by the silence which had preceded it; “I am Gaspard
Caderousse, at your service.”

“Gaspard Caderousse,” rejoined the priest. “Yes,—Christian and surname
are the same. You formerly lived, I believe in the Allées de Meilhan,
on the fourth floor?”

0325m



“I did.”

“And you followed the business of a tailor?”

“True, I was a tailor, till the trade fell off. It is so hot at
Marseilles, that really I believe that the respectable inhabitants will
in time go without any clothing whatever. But talking of heat, is there
nothing I can offer you by way of refreshment?”

“Yes; let me have a bottle of your best wine, and then, with your
permission, we will resume our conversation from where we left off.”

“As you please, sir,” said Caderousse, who, anxious not to lose the
present opportunity of finding a customer for one of the few bottles of
Cahors still remaining in his possession, hastily raised a trap-door in
the floor of the apartment they were in, which served both as parlor
and kitchen.

Upon issuing forth from his subterranean retreat at the 