shipowner.”

“Really, you should relate all this aloud, you would have the greatest
success.”

“He served in India, discovered a mine in Thessaly, and comes to Paris
to establish a mineral water-cure at Auteuil.”

“Well, I’m sure,” said Morcerf, “this is indeed news! Am I allowed to
repeat it?”

“Yes, but cautiously, tell one thing at a time, and do not say I told
you.”

“Why so?”

“Because it is a secret just discovered.”

“By whom?”

“The police.”

“Then the news originated——”

“At the prefect’s last night. Paris, you can understand, is astonished
at the sight of such unusual splendor, and the police have made
inquiries.”

“Well, well! Nothing more is wanting than to arrest the count as a
vagabond, on the pretext of his being too rich.”

“Indeed, that doubtless would have happened if his credentials had not
been so favorable.”

“Poor count! And is he aware of the danger he has been in?”

“I think not.”

“Then it will be but charitable to inform him. When he arrives, I will
not fail to do so.”

Just then, a handsome young man, with bright eyes, black hair, and
glossy moustache, respectfully bowed to Madame de Villefort. Albert
extended his hand.

“Madame,” said Albert, “allow me to present to you M. Maximilian
Morrel, captain of Spahis, one of our best, and, above all, of our
bravest officers.”

“I have already had the pleasure of meeting this gentleman at Auteuil,
at the house of the Count of Monte Cristo,” replied Madame de
Villefort, turning away with marked coldness of manner.

This answer, and especially the tone in which it was uttered, chilled
the heart of poor Morrel. But a recompense was in store for him;
turning around, he saw near the door a beautiful fair face, whose large
blue eyes were, without any marked expression, fixed upon him, while
the bouquet of myosotis was gently raised to her lips.

The salutation was so well understood that Morrel, with the same
expression in his eyes, placed his handkerchief to his mouth; and these
two living statues, whose hearts beat so violently under their marble
aspect, separated from each other by the whole length of the room,
forgot themselves for a moment, or rather forgot the world in their
mutual contemplation. They might have remained much longer lost in one
another, without anyone noticing their abstraction. The Count of Monte
Cristo had just entered.

We have already said that there was something in the count which
attracted universal attention wherever he appeared. It was not the
coat, unexceptional in its cut, though simple and unornamented; it was
not the plain white waistcoat; it was not the trousers, that displayed
the foot so perfectly formed—it was none of these things that attracted
the attention,—it was his pale complexion, his waving black hair, his
calm and serene expression, his dark and melancholy eye, his mouth,
chiselled with such marvellous delicacy, which so easily expressed such
high disdain,—these were what fixed the attention of all upon him.

Many men might have been handsomer, but certainly there could be none
whose appearance was more _significant_, if the expression may be used.
Everything about the count seemed to have its meaning, for the constant
habit of thought which he had acquired had given an ease and vigor to
the expression of his face, and even to the most trifling gesture,
scarcely to be understood. Yet the Parisian world is so strange, that
even all this might not have won attention had there not been connected
with it a mysterious story gilded by an immense fortune.

30301m



Meanwhile he advanced through the assemblage of guests under a battery
of curious glances towards Madame de Morcerf, who, standing before a
mantle-piece ornamented with flowers, had seen his entrance in a
looking-glass placed opposite the door, and was prepared to receive
him. She turned towards him with a serene smile just at the moment he
was bowing to her. No doub