. He had at once declared for a
military life, and had in consequence studied hard, passed brilliantly
through the Polytechnic School, and left it as sub-lieutenant of the
53rd of the line. For a year he had held this rank, and expected
promotion on the first vacancy. In his regiment Maximilian Morrel was
noted for his rigid observance, not only of the obligations imposed on
a soldier, but also of the duties of a man; and he thus gained the name
of “the stoic.” We need hardly say that many of those who gave him this
epithet repeated it because they had heard it, and did not even know
what it meant.

This was the young man whom his mother and sister called to their aid
to sustain them under the serious trial which they felt they would soon
have to endure. They had not mistaken the gravity of this event, for
the moment after Morrel had entered his private office with Cocles,
Julie saw the latter leave it pale, trembling, and his features
betraying the utmost consternation. She would have questioned him as he
passed by her, but the worthy creature hastened down the staircase with
unusual precipitation, and only raised his hands to heaven and
exclaimed:

“Oh, mademoiselle, mademoiselle, what a dreadful misfortune! Who could
ever have believed it!”

A moment afterwards Julie saw him go upstairs carrying two or three
heavy ledgers, a portfolio, and a bag of money.

Morrel examined the ledgers, opened the portfolio, and counted the
money. All his funds amounted to 6,000 or 8,000 francs, his bills
receivable up to the 5th to 4,000 or 5,000, which, making the best of
everything, gave him 14,000 francs to meet debts amounting to 287,500
francs. He had not even the means for making a possible settlement on
account.

However, when Morrel went down to his dinner, he appeared very calm.
This calmness was more alarming to the two women than the deepest
dejection would have been. After dinner Morrel usually went out and
used to take his coffee at the club of the Phocéens, and read the
_Semaphore_; this day he did not leave the house, but returned to his
office.

As to Cocles, he seemed completely bewildered. For part of the day he
went into the courtyard, seated himself on a stone with his head bare
and exposed to the blazing sun. Emmanuel tried to comfort the women,
but his eloquence faltered. The young man was too well acquainted with
the business of the house, not to feel that a great catastrophe hung
over the Morrel family. Night came, the two women had watched, hoping
that when he left his room Morrel would come to them, but they heard
him pass before their door, and trying to conceal the noise of his
footsteps. They listened; he went into his sleeping-room, and fastened
the door inside. Madame Morrel sent her daughter to bed, and half an
hour after Julie had retired, she rose, took off her shoes, and went
stealthily along the passage, to see through the keyhole what her
husband was doing.

In the passage she saw a retreating shadow; it was Julie, who, uneasy
herself, had anticipated her mother. The young lady went towards Madame
Morrel.

“He is writing,” she said.

They had understood each other without speaking. Madame Morrel looked
again through the keyhole, Morrel was writing; but Madame Morrel
remarked, what her daughter had not observed, that her husband was
writing on stamped paper. The terrible idea that he was writing his
will flashed across her; she shuddered, and yet had not strength to
utter a word.

Next day M. Morrel seemed as calm as ever, went into his office as
usual, came to his breakfast punctually, and then, after dinner, he
placed his daughter beside him, took her head in his arms, and held her
for a long time against his bosom. In the evening, Julie told her
mother, that although he was apparently so calm, she had noticed that
her father’s heart beat violently.

The next two days passed in much the same way. On the evening of the
4th of Sept