 step which
would be likely to compromise our happiness.”

40108m



“I promised him to wait,” replied Morrel; “and I will wait.”

At this moment Barrois entered. “Who rang?” asked Valentine.

“Doctor d’Avrigny,” said Barrois, staggering as if he would fall.

“What is the matter, Barrois?” said Valentine. The old man did not
answer, but looked at his master with wild staring eyes, while with his
cramped hand he grasped a piece of furniture to enable him to stand
upright.

“He is going to fall!” cried Morrel.

The rigors which had attacked Barrois gradually increased, the features
of the face became quite altered, and the convulsive movement of the
muscles appeared to indicate the approach of a most serious nervous
disorder. Noirtier, seeing Barrois in this pitiable condition, showed
by his looks all the various emotions of sorrow and sympathy which can
animate the heart of man. Barrois made some steps towards his master.

“Ah, sir,” said he, “tell me what is the matter with me. I am
suffering—I cannot see. A thousand fiery darts are piercing my brain.
Ah, don’t touch me, pray don’t.”

By this time his haggard eyes had the appearance of being ready to
start from their sockets; his head fell back, and the lower extremities
of the body began to stiffen. Valentine uttered a cry of horror; Morrel
took her in his arms, as if to defend her from some unknown danger.

“M. d’Avrigny, M. d’Avrigny,” cried she, in a stifled voice. “Help,
help!”

Barrois turned round and with a great effort stumbled a few steps, then
fell at the feet of Noirtier, and resting his hand on the knee of the
invalid, exclaimed:

“My master, my good master!”

At this moment M. de Villefort, attracted by the noise, appeared on the
threshold. Morrel relaxed his hold of Valentine, and retreating to a
distant corner of the room remained half hidden behind a curtain. Pale
as if he had been gazing on a serpent, he fixed his terrified eye on
the agonized sufferer.

Noirtier, burning with impatience and terror, was in despair at his
utter inability to help his old domestic, whom he regarded more in the
light of a friend than a servant. One might by the fearful swelling of
the veins of his forehead and the contraction of the muscles round the
eye, trace the terrible conflict which was going on between the living
energetic mind and the inanimate and helpless body.

Barrois, his features convulsed, his eyes suffused with blood, and his
head thrown back, was lying at full length, beating the floor with his
hands, while his legs had become so stiff, that they looked as if they
would break rather than bend. A slight appearance of foam was visible
around the mouth, and he breathed painfully, and with extreme
difficulty.

Villefort seemed stupefied with astonishment, and remained gazing
intently on the scene before him without uttering a word. He had not
seen Morrel. After a moment of dumb contemplation, during which his
face became pale and his hair seemed to stand on end, he sprang towards
the door, crying out:

“Doctor, doctor! come instantly, pray come!”

“Madame, madame!” cried Valentine, calling her step-mother, and running
upstairs to meet her; “come quick, quick!—and bring your bottle of
smelling-salts with you.”

“What is the matter?” said Madame de Villefort in a harsh and
constrained tone.

“Oh! come! come!”

“But where is the doctor?” exclaimed Villefort; “where is he?”

Madame de Villefort now deliberately descended the staircase. In one
hand she held her handkerchief, with which she appeared to be wiping
her face, and in the other a bottle of English smelling-salts. Her
first look on entering the room was at Noirtier, whose face,
independent of the emotion which such a scene could not fail of
producing, proclaimed him to be in possession of his usual health; her
second glance was at the dying man. She turned pale, and her eye passed
quickly from the servant and rested on the 