 and triumphant, like the Avenging Angel!



 Chapter 36. The Carnival at Rome

When Franz recovered his senses, he saw Albert drinking a glass of
water, of which, to judge from his pallor, he stood in great need; and
the count, who was assuming his masquerade costume. He glanced
mechanically towards the piazza—the scene was wholly changed; scaffold,
executioners, victims, all had disappeared; only the people remained,
full of noise and excitement. The bell of Monte Citorio, which only
sounds on the pope’s decease and the opening of the Carnival, was
ringing a joyous peal.

“Well,” asked he of the count, “what has, then, happened?”

“Nothing,” replied the count; “only, as you see, the Carnival has
commenced. Make haste and dress yourself.”

“In fact,” said Franz, “this horrible scene has passed away like a
dream.”

“It is but a dream, a nightmare, that has disturbed you.”

“Yes, that I have suffered; but the culprit?”

“That is a dream also; only he has remained asleep, while you have
awakened; and who knows which of you is the most fortunate?”

“But Peppino—what has become of him?”

“Peppino is a lad of sense, who, unlike most men, who are happy in
proportion as they are noticed, was delighted to see that the general
attention was directed towards his companion. He profited by this
distraction to slip away among the crowd, without even thanking the
worthy priests who accompanied him. Decidedly man is an ungrateful and
egotistical animal. But dress yourself; see, M. de Morcerf sets you the
example.”

Albert was drawing on the satin pantaloon over his black trousers and
varnished boots.

“Well, Albert,” said Franz, “do you feel much inclined to join the
revels? Come, answer frankly.”

“_Ma foi_, no,” returned Albert. “But I am really glad to have seen
such a sight; and I understand what the count said—that when you have
once habituated yourself to a similar spectacle, it is the only one
that causes you any emotion.”

20175m



“Without reflecting that this is the only moment in which you can study
character,” said the count; “on the steps of the scaffold death tears
off the mask that has been worn through life, and the real visage is
disclosed. It must be allowed that Andrea was not very handsome, the
hideous scoundrel! Come, dress yourselves, gentlemen, dress
yourselves.”

Franz felt it would be ridiculous not to follow his two companions’
example. He assumed his costume, and fastened on the mask that scarcely
equalled the pallor of his own face. Their toilet finished, they
descended; the carriage awaited them at the door, filled with
sweetmeats and bouquets. They fell into the line of carriages.

It is difficult to form an idea of the perfect change that had taken
place. Instead of the spectacle of gloomy and silent death, the Piazza
del Popolo presented a spectacle of gay and noisy mirth and revelry. A
crowd of masks flowed in from all sides, emerging from the doors,
descending from the windows. From every street and every corner drove
carriages filled with clowns, harlequins, dominoes, mummers,
pantomimists, Transteverins, knights, and peasants, screaming,
fighting, gesticulating, throwing eggs filled with flour, confetti,
nosegays, attacking, with their sarcasms and their missiles, friends
and foes, companions and strangers, indiscriminately, and no one took
offence, or did anything but laugh.

Franz and Albert were like men who, to drive away a violent sorrow,
have recourse to wine, and who, as they drink and become intoxicated,
feel a thick veil drawn between the past and the present. They saw, or
rather continued to see, the image of what they had witnessed; but
little by little the general vertigo seized them, and they felt
themselves obliged to take part in the noise and confusion.

A handful of confetti that came from a neighboring carriage, and which,
while it covered Morcerf and his two companions with dust, pricked his
neck an