ns.
Tobias took the angel who restored him to light for an ordinary young
man. The nations took Attila, who was doomed to destroy them, for a
conqueror similar to other conquerors, and it was necessary for both to
reveal their missions, that they might be known and acknowledged; one
was compelled to say, ‘I am the angel of the Lord’; and the other, ‘I
am the hammer of God,’ in order that the divine essence in both might
be revealed.”

“Then,” said Villefort, more and more amazed, and really supposing he
was speaking to a mystic or a madman, “you consider yourself as one of
those extraordinary beings whom you have mentioned?”

“And why not?” said Monte Cristo coldly.

“Your pardon, sir,” replied Villefort, quite astounded, “but you will
excuse me if, when I presented myself to you, I was unaware that I
should meet with a person whose knowledge and understanding so far
surpass the usual knowledge and understanding of men. It is not usual
with us corrupted wretches of civilization to find gentlemen like
yourself, possessors, as you are, of immense fortune—at least, so it is
said—and I beg you to observe that I do not inquire, I merely
repeat;—it is not usual, I say, for such privileged and wealthy beings
to waste their time in speculations on the state of society, in
philosophical reveries, intended at best to console those whom fate has
disinherited from the goods of this world.”

“Really, sir,” retorted the count, “have you attained the eminent
situation in which you are, without having admitted, or even without
having met with exceptions? and do you never use your eyes, which must
have acquired so much _finesse_ and certainty, to divine, at a glance,
the kind of man by whom you are confronted? Should not a magistrate be
not merely the best administrator of the law, but the most crafty
expounder of the chicanery of his profession, a steel probe to search
hearts, a touchstone to try the gold which in each soul is mingled with
more or less of alloy?”

“Sir,” said Villefort, “upon my word, you overcome me. I really never
heard a person speak as you do.”

“Because you remain eternally encircled in a round of general
conditions, and have never dared to raise your wings into those upper
spheres which God has peopled with invisible or exceptional beings.”

“And you allow then, sir, that spheres exist, and that these marked and
invisible beings mingle amongst us?”

“Why should they not? Can you see the air you breathe, and yet without
which you could not for a moment exist?”

“Then we do not see those beings to whom you allude?”

“Yes, we do; you see them whenever God pleases to allow them to assume
a material form. You touch them, come in contact with them, speak to
them, and they reply to you.”

“Ah,” said Villefort, smiling, “I confess I should like to be warned
when one of these beings is in contact with me.”

“You have been served as you desire, monsieur, for you were warned just
now, and I now again warn you.”

“Then you yourself are one of these marked beings?”

“Yes, monsieur, I believe so; for until now, no man has found himself
in a position similar to mine. The dominions of kings are limited
either by mountains or rivers, or a change of manners, or an alteration
of language. My kingdom is bounded only by the world, for I am not an
Italian, or a Frenchman, or a Hindu, or an American, or a Spaniard—I am
a cosmopolite. No country can say it saw my birth. God alone knows what
country will see me die. I adopt all customs, speak all languages. You
believe me to be a Frenchman, for I speak French with the same facility
and purity as yourself. Well, Ali, my Nubian, believes me to be an
Arab; Bertuccio, my steward, takes me for a Roman; Haydée, my slave,
thinks me a Greek. You may, therefore, comprehend, that being of no
country, asking no protection from any government, acknowledging no man
as my brother, not one of the scruples that arrest the powerful, or 