 to dinner, something tells me that we shall get
that money back. Besides, you forget, Cæsar, an indigestion declares
itself immediately, while a prick or a bite occasions a delay of a day
or two.’ Cæsar gave way before such cogent reasoning, and the cardinals
were consequently invited to dinner.

“The table was laid in a vineyard belonging to the pope, near San
Pierdarena, a charming retreat which the cardinals knew very well by
report. Rospigliosi, quite set up with his new dignities, went with a
good appetite and his most ingratiating manner. Spada, a prudent man,
and greatly attached to his only nephew, a young captain of the highest
promise, took paper and pen, and made his will. He then sent word to
his nephew to wait for him near the vineyard; but it appeared the
servant did not find him.

“Spada knew what these invitations meant; since Christianity, so
eminently civilizing, had made progress in Rome, it was no longer a
centurion who came from the tyrant with a message, ‘Cæsar wills that
you die.’ but it was a legate _à latere_, who came with a smile on his
lips to say from the pope, ‘His holiness requests you to dine with
him.’

“Spada set out about two o’clock to San Pierdarena. The pope awaited
him. The first sight that attracted the eyes of Spada was that of his
nephew, in full costume, and Cæsar Borgia paying him most marked
attentions. Spada turned pale, as Cæsar looked at him with an ironical
air, which proved that he had anticipated all, and that the snare was
well spread.

“They began dinner and Spada was only able to inquire of his nephew if
he had received his message. The nephew replied no; perfectly
comprehending the meaning of the question. It was too late, for he had
already drunk a glass of excellent wine, placed for him expressly by
the pope’s butler. Spada at the same moment saw another bottle approach
him, which he was pressed to taste. An hour afterwards a physician
declared they were both poisoned through eating mushrooms. Spada died
on the threshold of the vineyard; the nephew expired at his own door,
making signs which his wife could not comprehend.

“Then Cæsar and the pope hastened to lay hands on the heritage, under
pretense of seeking for the papers of the dead man. But the inheritance
consisted in this only, a scrap of paper on which Spada had written:—‘I
bequeath to my beloved nephew my coffers, my books, and, amongst
others, my breviary with the gold corners, which I beg he will preserve
in remembrance of his affectionate uncle.’

“The heirs sought everywhere, admired the breviary, laid hands on the
furniture, and were greatly astonished that Spada, the rich man, was
really the most miserable of uncles—no treasures—unless they were those
of science, contained in the library and laboratories. That was all.
Cæsar and his father searched, examined, scrutinized, but found
nothing, or at least very little; not exceeding a few thousand crowns
in plate, and about the same in ready money; but the nephew had time to
say to his wife before he expired: ‘Look well among my uncle’s papers;
there is a will.’

“They sought even more thoroughly than the august heirs had done, but
it was fruitless. There were two palaces and a vineyard behind the
Palatine Hill; but in these days landed property had not much value,
and the two palaces and the vineyard remained to the family since they
were beneath the rapacity of the pope and his son. Months and years
rolled on. Alexander VI. died, poisoned,—you know by what mistake.
Cæsar, poisoned at the same time, escaped by shedding his skin like a
snake; but the new skin was spotted by the poison till it looked like a
tiger’s. Then, compelled to quit Rome, he went and got himself
obscurely killed in a night skirmish, scarcely noticed in history.

“After the pope’s death and his son’s exile, it was supposed that the
Spada family would resume the splendid position they had held before
the cardinal’s time