s trouble;
but I thought this mark of consideration due to you. I took a week to
go, another to return, four days of quarantine, and forty-eight hours
to stay there; that makes three weeks. I returned last night, and here
I am.”

“What circumlocution! How long you are before you tell me what I most
wish to know?”

“Because, in truth, Albert——”

“You hesitate?”

“Yes,—I fear.”

“You fear to acknowledge that your correspondent has deceived you? Oh,
no self-love, Beauchamp. Acknowledge it, Beauchamp; your courage cannot
be doubted.”

“Not so,” murmured the journalist; “on the contrary——”

Albert turned frightfully pale; he endeavored to speak, but the words
died on his lips.

“My friend,” said Beauchamp, in the most affectionate tone, “I should
gladly make an apology; but, alas!——”

“But what?”

“The paragraph was correct, my friend.”

“What? That French officer——”

“Yes.”

“Fernand?”

“Yes.”

“The traitor who surrendered the castle of the man in whose service he
was——”

“Pardon me, my friend, that man was your father!”

Albert advanced furiously towards Beauchamp, but the latter restrained
him more by a mild look than by his extended hand.

“My friend,” said he, “here is a proof of it.”

40176m



Albert opened the paper, it was an attestation of four notable
inhabitants of Yanina, proving that Colonel Fernand Mondego, in the
service of Ali Tepelini, had surrendered the castle for two million
crowns. The signatures were perfectly legal. Albert tottered and fell
overpowered in a chair. It could no longer be doubted; the family name
was fully given. After a moment’s mournful silence, his heart
overflowed, and he gave way to a flood of tears. Beauchamp, who had
watched with sincere pity the young man’s paroxysm of grief, approached
him.

“Now, Albert,” said he, “you understand me—do you not? I wished to see
all, and to judge of everything for myself, hoping the explanation
would be in your father’s favor, and that I might do him justice. But,
on the contrary, the particulars which are given prove that Fernand
Mondego, raised by Ali Pasha to the rank of governor-general, is no
other than Count Fernand of Morcerf; then, recollecting the honor you
had done me, in admitting me to your friendship, I hastened to you.”

Albert, still extended on the chair, covered his face with both hands,
as if to prevent the light from reaching him.

“I hastened to you,” continued Beauchamp, “to tell you, Albert, that in
this changing age, the faults of a father cannot revert upon his
children. Few have passed through this revolutionary period, in the
midst of which we were born, without some stain of infamy or blood to
soil the uniform of the soldier, or the gown of the magistrate. Now I
have these proofs, Albert, and I am in your confidence, no human power
can force me to a duel which your own conscience would reproach you
with as criminal, but I come to offer you what you can no longer demand
of me. Do you wish these proofs, these attestations, which I alone
possess, to be destroyed? Do you wish this frightful secret to remain
with us? Confided to me, it shall never escape my lips; say, Albert, my
friend, do you wish it?”

Albert threw himself on Beauchamp’s neck.

“Ah, noble fellow!” cried he.

“Take these,” said Beauchamp, presenting the papers to Albert.

Albert seized them with a convulsive hand, tore them in pieces, and
trembling lest the least vestige should escape and one day appear to
confront him, he approached the wax-light, always kept burning for
cigars, and burned every fragment.

“Dear, excellent friend,” murmured Albert, still burning the papers.

“Let all be forgotten as a sorrowful dream,” said Beauchamp; “let it
vanish as the last sparks from the blackened paper, and disappear as
the smoke from those silent ashes.”

“Yes, yes,” said Albert, “and may there remain only the eternal
friendship which I promised to my deliverer, which 