o the usual state of
affairs in discussions between the young men, the effective arguments
were all on Albert’s side.

“Well,” said Franz with a sigh, “do as you please my dear viscount, for
your arguments are beyond my powers of refutation. Still, in spite of
all, you must admit that this Count of Monte Cristo is a most singular
personage.”

“He is a philanthropist,” answered the other; “and no doubt his motive
in visiting Paris is to compete for the Monthyon prize, given, as you
are aware, to whoever shall be proved to have most materially advanced
the interests of virtue and humanity. If my vote and interest can
obtain it for him, I will readily give him the one and promise the
other. And now, my dear Franz, let us talk of something else. Come,
shall we take our luncheon, and then pay a last visit to St. Peter’s?”

Franz silently assented; and the following afternoon, at half-past five
o’clock, the young men parted. Albert de Morcerf to return to Paris,
and Franz d’Épinay to pass a fortnight at Venice.

But, ere he entered his travelling carriage, Albert, fearing that his
expected guest might forget the engagement he had entered into, placed
in the care of a waiter at the hotel a card to be delivered to the
Count of Monte Cristo, on which, beneath the name of Viscount Albert de
Morcerf, he had written in pencil:

“27, _Rue du Helder, on the_ 21_st May, half-past ten_ A.M.”



 Chapter 39. The Guests

In the house in the Rue du Helder, where Albert had invited the Count
of Monte Cristo, everything was being prepared on the morning of the
21st of May to do honor to the occasion. Albert de Morcerf inhabited a
pavilion situated at the corner of a large court, and directly opposite
another building, in which were the servants’ apartments. Two windows
only of the pavilion faced the street; three other windows looked into
the court, and two at the back into the garden.

Between the court and the garden, built in the heavy style of the
imperial architecture, was the large and fashionable dwelling of the
Count and Countess of Morcerf.

A high wall surrounded the whole of the property, surmounted at
intervals by vases filled with flowers, and broken in the centre by a
large gate of gilded iron, which served as the carriage entrance. A
small door, close to the lodge of the _concierge_, gave ingress and
egress to the servants and masters when they were on foot.

It was easy to discover that the delicate care of a mother, unwilling
to part from her son, and yet aware that a young man of the viscount’s
age required the full exercise of his liberty, had chosen this
habitation for Albert. There were not lacking, however, evidences of
what we may call the intelligent egoism of a youth who is charmed with
the indolent, careless life of an only son, and who lives as it were in
a gilded cage. By means of the two windows looking into the street,
Albert could see all that passed; the sight of what is going on is
necessary to young men, who always want to see the world traverse their
horizon, even if that horizon is only a public thoroughfare. Then,
should anything appear to merit a more minute examination, Albert de
Morcerf could follow up his researches by means of a small gate,
similar to that close to the _concierge’s_ door, and which merits a
particular description.

It was a little entrance that seemed never to have been opened since
the house was built, so entirely was it covered with dust and dirt; but
the well-oiled hinges and locks told quite another story. This door was
a mockery to the _concierge_, from whose vigilance and jurisdiction it
was free, and, like that famous portal in the _Arabian Nights_, opening
at the “_Sesame_” of Ali Baba, it was wont to swing backward at a
cabalistic word or a concerted tap from without from the sweetest
voices or whitest fingers in the world.

At the end of a long corridor, with which the door communicated, and
which formed 