ved that brucine is a violent
poison.”

“Oh, have pity—have pity!” murmured Villefort, wringing his hands.

“Follow the culprit’s steps; he first kills M. de Saint-Méran——”

“Oh, doctor!”

“I would swear to it; what I heard of his symptoms agrees too well with
what I have seen in the other cases.” Villefort ceased to contend; he
only groaned. “He first kills M. de Saint-Méran,” repeated the doctor,
“then Madame de Saint-Méran,—a double fortune to inherit.” Villefort
wiped the perspiration from his forehead. “Listen attentively.”

“Alas,” stammered Villefort, “I do not lose a single word.”

“M. Noirtier,” resumed M. d’Avrigny in the same pitiless tone,—“M.
Noirtier had once made a will against you—against your family—in favor
of the poor, in fact; M. Noirtier is spared, because nothing is
expected from him. But he has no sooner destroyed his first will and
made a second, than, for fear he should make a third, he is struck
down. The will was made the day before yesterday, I believe; you see
there has been no time lost.”

“Oh, mercy, M. d’Avrigny!”

“No mercy, sir! The physician has a sacred mission on earth; and to
fulfil it he begins at the source of life, and goes down to the
mysterious darkness of the tomb. When crime has been committed, and
God, doubtless in anger, turns away his face, it is for the physician
to bring the culprit to justice.”

40122m



“Have mercy on my child, sir,” murmured Villefort.

“You see it is yourself who have first named her—you, her father.”

“Have pity on Valentine! Listen, it is impossible. I would as willingly
accuse myself! Valentine, whose heart is pure as a diamond or a lily!”

“No pity, procureur; the crime is fragrant. Mademoiselle herself packed
all the medicines which were sent to M. de Saint-Méran; and M. de
Saint-Méran is dead. Mademoiselle de Villefort prepared all the cooling
draughts which Madame de Saint-Méran took, and Madame de Saint-Méran is
dead. Mademoiselle de Villefort took from the hands of Barrois, who was
sent out, the lemonade which M. Noirtier had every morning, and he has
escaped by a miracle. Mademoiselle de Villefort is the culprit—she is
the poisoner! To you, as the king’s attorney, I denounce Mademoiselle
de Villefort, do your duty.”

“Doctor, I resist no longer—I can no longer defend myself—I believe
you; but, for pity’s sake, spare my life, my honor!”

“M. de Villefort,” replied the doctor, with increased vehemence, “there
are occasions when I dispense with all foolish human circumspection. If
your daughter had committed only one crime, and I saw her meditating
another, I would say ‘Warn her, punish her, let her pass the remainder
of her life in a convent, weeping and praying.’ If she had committed
two crimes, I would say, ‘Here, M. de Villefort, is a poison that the
prisoner is not acquainted with,—one that has no known antidote, quick
as thought, rapid as lightning, mortal as the thunderbolt; give her
that poison, recommending her soul to God, and save your honor and your
life, for it is yours she aims at; and I can picture her approaching
your pillow with her hypocritical smiles and her sweet exhortations.
Woe to you, M. de Villefort, if you do not strike first!’ This is what
I would say had she only killed two persons but she has seen three
deaths,—has contemplated three murdered persons,—has knelt by three
corpses! To the scaffold with the poisoner—to the scaffold! Do you talk
of your honor? Do what I tell you, and immortality awaits you!”

Villefort fell on his knees.

“Listen,” said he; “I have not the strength of mind you have, or rather
that which you would not have, if instead of my daughter Valentine your
daughter Madeleine were concerned.” The doctor turned pale. “Doctor,
every son of woman is born to suffer and to die; I am content to suffer
and to await death.”

“Beware,” said M. d’Avrigny, “it may come slowly; you will see it
approach after having struck your father