gh that was almost
a deep sob; he looked in the direction whence it came, and there under
an arbor of Virginia jessamine,29 with its thick foliage and beautiful
long purple flowers, he saw Mercédès seated, with her head bowed, and
weeping bitterly. She had raised her veil, and with her face hidden by
her hands was giving free scope to the sighs and tears which had been
so long restrained by the presence of her son.

Monte Cristo advanced a few steps, which were heard on the gravel.
Mercédès raised her head, and uttered a cry of terror on beholding a
man before her.

50211m



“Madame,” said the count, “it is no longer in my power to restore you
to happiness, but I offer you consolation; will you deign to accept it
as coming from a friend?”

“I am, indeed, most wretched,” replied Mercédès. “Alone in the world, I
had but my son, and he has left me!”

“He possesses a noble heart, madame,” replied the count, “and he has
acted rightly. He feels that every man owes a tribute to his country;
some contribute their talents, others their industry; these devote
their blood, those their nightly labors, to the same cause. Had he
remained with you, his life must have become a hateful burden, nor
would he have participated in your griefs. He will increase in strength
and honor by struggling with adversity, which he will convert into
prosperity. Leave him to build up the future for you, and I venture to
say you will confide it to safe hands.”

“Oh,” replied the wretched woman, mournfully shaking her head, “the
prosperity of which you speak, and which, from the bottom of my heart,
I pray God in his mercy to grant him, I can never enjoy. The bitter cup
of adversity has been drained by me to the very dregs, and I feel that
the grave is not far distant. You have acted kindly, count, in bringing
me back to the place where I have enjoyed so much bliss. I ought to
meet death on the same spot where happiness was once all my own.”

“Alas,” said Monte Cristo, “your words sear and embitter my heart, the
more so as you have every reason to hate me. I have been the cause of
all your misfortunes; but why do you pity, instead of blaming me? You
render me still more unhappy——”

“Hate you, blame you—_you_, Edmond! Hate, reproach, the man that has
spared my son’s life! For was it not your fatal and sanguinary
intention to destroy that son of whom M. de Morcerf was so proud? Oh,
look at me closely, and discover, if you can, even the semblance of a
reproach in me.”

The count looked up and fixed his eyes on Mercédès, who arose partly
from her seat and extended both her hands towards him.

“Oh, look at me,” continued she, with a feeling of profound melancholy,
“my eyes no longer dazzle by their brilliancy, for the time has long
fled since I used to smile on Edmond Dantès, who anxiously looked out
for me from the window of yonder garret, then inhabited by his old
father. Years of grief have created an abyss between those days and the
present. I neither reproach you nor hate you, my friend. Oh, no,
Edmond, it is myself that I blame, myself that I hate! Oh, miserable
creature that I am!” cried she, clasping her hands, and raising her
eyes to heaven. “I once possessed piety, innocence, and love, the three
ingredients of the happiness of angels, and now what am I?”

Monte Cristo approached her, and silently took her hand.

“No,” said she, withdrawing it gently—“no, my friend, touch me not. You
have spared me, yet of all those who have fallen under your vengeance I
was the most guilty. They were influenced by hatred, by avarice, and by
self-love; but I was base, and for want of courage acted against my
judgment. Nay, do not press my hand, Edmond; you are thinking, I am
sure, of some kind speech to console me, but do not utter it to me,
reserve it for others more worthy of your kindness. See” (and she
exposed her face completely to view)—“see, misfortune has silvered my
hair, my eyes have shed s