roprietors.

“Bertuccio,” said he, “give fifty-five thousand francs to monsieur.”

The steward left the room with a faltering step, and returned with a
bundle of bank-notes, which the notary counted like a man who never
gives a receipt for money until after he is sure it is all there.

“And now,” demanded the count, “are all the forms complied with?”

“All, sir.”

“Have you the keys?”

“They are in the hands of the concierge, who takes care of the house,
but here is the order I have given him to install the count in his new
possessions.”

“Very well;” and Monte Cristo made a sign with his hand to the notary,
which said, “I have no further need of you; you may go.”

“But,” observed the honest notary, “the count is, I think, mistaken; it
is only fifty thousand francs, everything included.”

“And your fee?”

“Is included in this sum.”

“But have you not come from Auteuil here?”

“Yes, certainly.”

“Well, then, it is but fair that you should be paid for your loss of
time and trouble,” said the count; and he made a gesture of polite
dismissal.

The notary left the room backwards, and bowing down to the ground; it
was the first time he had ever met a similar client.

“See this gentleman out,” said the count to Bertuccio. And the steward
followed the notary out of the room.

Scarcely was the count alone, when he drew from his pocket a book
closed with a lock, and opened it with a key which he wore round his
neck, and which never left him. After having sought for a few minutes,
he stopped at a leaf which had several notes, and compared them with
the deed of sale, which lay on the table, and recalling his
_souvenirs_—

“‘Auteuil, Rue de la Fontaine, No. 28;’ it is indeed the same,” said
he; “and now, am I to rely upon an avowal extorted by religious or
physical terror? However, in an hour I shall know all. Bertuccio!”
cried he, striking a light hammer with a pliant handle on a small gong.
“Bertuccio!”

The steward appeared at the door.

“Monsieur Bertuccio,” said the count, “did you never tell me that you
had travelled in France?”

“In some parts of France—yes, excellency.”

“You know the environs of Paris, then?”

“No, excellency, no,” returned the steward, with a sort of nervous
trembling, which Monte Cristo, a connoisseur in all emotions, rightly
attributed to great disquietude.

“It is unfortunate,” returned he, “that you have never visited the
environs, for I wish to see my new property this evening, and had you
gone with me, you could have given me some useful information.”

“To Auteuil!” cried Bertuccio, whose copper complexion became livid—“I
go to Auteuil?”

“Well, what is there surprising in that? When I live at Auteuil, you
must come there, as you belong to my service.”

Bertuccio hung down his head before the imperious look of his master,
and remained motionless, without making any answer.

“Why, what has happened to you?—are you going to make me ring a second
time for the carriage?” asked Monte Cristo, in the same tone that Louis
XIV. pronounced the famous, “I have been almost obliged to wait.”
Bertuccio made but one bound to the antechamber, and cried in a hoarse
voice:

“His excellency’s horses!”

Monte Cristo wrote two or three notes, and, as he sealed the last, the
steward appeared.

“Your excellency’s carriage is at the door,” said he.

“Well, take your hat and gloves,” returned Monte Cristo.

“Am I to accompany you, your excellency?” cried Bertuccio.

“Certainly, you must give the orders, for I intend residing at the
house.”

20277m



It was unexampled for a servant of the count’s to dare to dispute an
order of his, so the steward, without saying a word, followed his
master, who got into the carriage, and signed to him to follow, which
he did, taking his place respectfully on the front seat.



 Chapter 43. The House at Auteuil

Monte Cristo noticed, as they descended the staircase, that Bertuccio
signe