my daughter’s hand for you, I decidedly refused
him, but without any explanation or exposure. In short, why should I
have any more to do with the affair? How did the honor or disgrace of
M. de Morcerf affect me? It neither increased nor decreased my income.”

Albert felt the blood mounting to his brow; there was no doubt upon the
subject. Danglars defended himself with the baseness, but at the same
time with the assurance, of a man who speaks the truth, at least in
part, if not wholly—not for conscience’ sake, but through fear.
Besides, what was Morcerf seeking? It was not whether Danglars or Monte
Cristo was more or less guilty; it was a man who would answer for the
offence, whether trifling or serious; it was a man who would fight, and
it was evident Danglars would not fight.

In addition to this, everything forgotten or unperceived before
presented itself now to his recollection. Monte Cristo knew everything,
as he had bought the daughter of Ali Pasha; and, knowing everything, he
had advised Danglars to write to Yanina. The answer known, he had
yielded to Albert’s wish to be introduced to Haydée, and allowed the
conversation to turn on the death of Ali, and had not opposed Haydée’s
recital (but having, doubtless, warned the young girl, in the few
Romaic words he spoke to her, not to implicate Morcerf’s father).
Besides, had he not begged of Morcerf not to mention his father’s name
before Haydée? Lastly, he had taken Albert to Normandy when he knew the
final blow was near. There could be no doubt that all had been
calculated and previously arranged; Monte Cristo then was in league
with his father’s enemies. Albert took Beauchamp aside, and
communicated these ideas to him.

“You are right,” said the latter; “M. Danglars has only been a
secondary agent in this sad affair, and it is of M. de Monte Cristo
that you must demand an explanation.”

Albert turned.

“Sir,” said he to Danglars, “understand that I do not take a final
leave of you; I must ascertain if your insinuations are just, and am
going now to inquire of the Count of Monte Cristo.”

He bowed to the banker, and went out with Beauchamp, without appearing
to notice Cavalcanti. Danglars accompanied him to the door, where he
again assured Albert that no motive of personal hatred had influenced
him against the Count of Morcerf.



 Chapter 88. The Insult

At the banker’s door Beauchamp stopped Morcerf.

“Listen,” said he; “just now I told you it was of M. de Monte Cristo
you must demand an explanation.”

“Yes; and we are going to his house.”

“Reflect, Morcerf, one moment before you go.”

“On what shall I reflect?”

“On the importance of the step you are taking.”

“Is it more serious than going to M. Danglars?”

“Yes; M. Danglars is a money-lover, and those who love money, you know,
think too much of what they risk to be easily induced to fight a duel.
The other is, on the contrary, to all appearance a true nobleman; but
do you not fear to find him a bully?”

“I only fear one thing; namely, to find a man who will not fight.”

“Do not be alarmed,” said Beauchamp; “he will meet you. My only fear is
that he will be too strong for you.”

“My friend,” said Morcerf, with a sweet smile, “that is what I wish.
The happiest thing that could occur to me, would be to die in my
father’s stead; that would save us all.”

“Your mother would die of grief.”

“My poor mother!” said Albert, passing his hand across his eyes, “I
know she would; but better so than die of shame.”

“Are you quite decided, Albert?”

“Yes; let us go.”

“But do you think we shall find the count at home?”

“He intended returning some hours after me, and doubtless he is now at
home.”

They ordered the driver to take them to No. 30 Champs-Élysées.
Beauchamp wished to go in alone, but Albert observed that as this was
an unusual circumstance he might be allowed to deviate from the usual
etiquette of duels. The cause which the you