it
is now sufficiently clear that he will never do so; therefore talk all
this quietly over with your mother, and tell her to marry the best man,
and the one who makes her the most advantageous offer. Thus you will
yourself be able to manage your own inheritance, and to eat and drink
in peace, while your mother will look after some other man’s house, not
yours.’”

To this Telemachus answered, “By Jove, Agelaus, and by the sorrows of
my unhappy father, who has either perished far from Ithaca, or is
wandering in some distant land, I throw no obstacles in the way of my
mother’s marriage; on the contrary I urge her to choose whomsoever she
will, and I will give her numberless gifts into the bargain, but I dare
not insist point blank that she shall leave the house against her own
wishes. Heaven forbid that I should do this.”

Minerva now made the suitors fall to laughing immoderately, and set
their wits wandering; but they were laughing with a forced laughter.
Their meat became smeared with blood; their eyes filled with tears, and
their hearts were heavy with forebodings. Theoclymenus saw this and
said, “Unhappy men, what is it that ails you? There is a shroud of
darkness drawn over you from head to foot, your cheeks are wet with
tears; the air is alive with wailing voices; the walls and roof-beams
drip blood; the gate of the cloisters and the court beyond them are
full of ghosts trooping down into the night of hell; the sun is blotted
out of heaven, and a blighting gloom is over all the land.”

Thus did he speak, and they all of them laughed heartily. Eurymachus
then said, “This stranger who has lately come here has lost his senses.
Servants, turn him out into the streets, since he finds it so dark
here.”

But Theoclymenus said, “Eurymachus, you need not send any one with me.
I have eyes, ears, and a pair of feet of my own, to say nothing of an
understanding mind. I will take these out of the house with me, for I
see mischief overhanging you, from which not one of you men who are
insulting people and plotting ill deeds in the house of Ulysses will be
able to escape.”

He left the house as he spoke, and went back to Piraeus who gave him
welcome, but the suitors kept looking at one another and provoking
Telemachus by laughing at the strangers. One insolent fellow said to
him, “Telemachus, you are not happy in your guests; first you have this
importunate tramp, who comes begging bread and wine and has no skill
for work or for hard fighting, but is perfectly useless, and now here
is another fellow who is setting himself up as a prophet. Let me
persuade you, for it will be much better to put them on board ship and
send them off to the Sicels to sell for what they will bring.”

Telemachus gave him no heed, but sat silently watching his father,
expecting every moment that he would begin his attack upon the suitors.

Meanwhile the daughter of Icarius, wise Penelope, had had a rich seat
placed for her facing the court and cloisters, so that she could hear
what every one was saying. The dinner indeed had been prepared amid
much merriment; it had been both good and abundant, for they had
sacrificed many victims; but the supper was yet to come, and nothing
can be conceived more gruesome than the meal which a goddess and a
brave man were soon to lay before them—for they had brought their doom
upon themselves.




BOOK XXI


THE TRIAL OF THE AXES, DURING WHICH ULYSSES REVEALS HIMSELF TO EUMAEUS
AND PHILOETIUS


Minerva now put it in Penelope’s mind to make the suitors try their
skill with the bow and with the iron axes, in contest among themselves,
as a means of bringing about their destruction. She went upstairs and
got the store-room key, which was made of bronze and had a handle of
ivory; she then went with her maidens into the store-room at the end of
the house, where her husband’s treasures of gold, bronze, and wrought
iron were kept, and where was also his bow, a