m!”

“With all his millions, he will not have enough to pay for his shroud!”
said another.

“Oh,” added a third voice, “the shrouds of the Château d’If are not
dear!”

0257m



“Perhaps,” said one of the previous speakers, “as he was a churchman,
they may go to some expense in his behalf.”

“They may give him the honors of the sack.”

Edmond did not lose a word, but comprehended very little of what was
said. The voices soon ceased, and it seemed to him as if everyone had
left the cell. Still he dared not to enter, as they might have left
some turnkey to watch the dead. He remained, therefore, mute and
motionless, hardly venturing to breathe. At the end of an hour, he
heard a faint noise, which increased. It was the governor who returned,
followed by the doctor and other attendants. There was a moment’s
silence,—it was evident that the doctor was examining the dead body.
The inquiries soon commenced.

The doctor analyzed the symptoms of the malady to which the prisoner
had succumbed, and declared that he was dead. Questions and answers
followed in a nonchalant manner that made Dantès indignant, for he felt
that all the world should have for the poor abbé a love and respect
equal to his own.

“I am very sorry for what you tell me,” said the governor, replying to
the assurance of the doctor, “that the old man is really dead; for he
was a quiet, inoffensive prisoner, happy in his folly, and required no
watching.”

“Ah,” added the turnkey, “there was no occasion for watching him; he
would have stayed here fifty years, I’ll answer for it, without any
attempt to escape.”

“Still,” said the governor, “I believe it will be requisite,
notwithstanding your certainty, and not that I doubt your science, but
in discharge of my official duty, that we should be perfectly assured
that the prisoner is dead.”

There was a moment of complete silence, during which Dantès, still
listening, knew that the doctor was examining the corpse a second time.

“You may make your mind easy,” said the doctor; “he is dead. I will
answer for that.”

“You know, sir,” said the governor, persisting, “that we are not
content in such cases as this with such a simple examination. In spite
of all appearances, be so kind, therefore, as to finish your duty by
fulfilling the formalities described by law.”

“Let the irons be heated,” said the doctor; “but really it is a useless
precaution.”

This order to heat the irons made Dantès shudder. He heard hasty steps,
the creaking of a door, people going and coming, and some minutes
afterwards a turnkey entered, saying:

“Here is the brazier, lighted.”

There was a moment’s silence, and then was heard the crackling of
burning flesh, of which the peculiar and nauseous smell penetrated even
behind the wall where Dantès was listening in horror. The perspiration
poured forth upon the young man’s brow, and he felt as if he should
faint.

“You see, sir, he is really dead,” said the doctor; “this burn in the
heel is decisive. The poor fool is cured of his folly, and delivered
from his captivity.”

“Wasn’t his name Faria?” inquired one of the officers who accompanied
the governor.

0259m



“Yes, sir; and, as he said, it was an ancient name. He was, too, very
learned, and rational enough on all points which did not relate to his
treasure; but on that, indeed, he was intractable.”

“It is the sort of malady which we call monomania,” said the doctor.

“You had never anything to complain of?” said the governor to the
jailer who had charge of the abbé.

“Never, sir,” replied the jailer, “never; on the contrary, he sometimes
amused me very much by telling me stories. One day, too, when my wife
was ill, he gave me a prescription which cured her.”

“Ah, ah!” said the doctor, “I did not know that I had a rival; but I
hope, governor, that you will show him all proper respect in
consequence.”

“Yes, yes, make your mind easy, he shall be decently i