ccupied in examining the theatre in search of her guardian,
perceived his pale features close to Morcerf’s face. It was as if the
young girl beheld the head of Medusa. She bent forwards as though to
assure herself of the reality of what she saw, then, uttering a faint
cry, threw herself back in her seat. The sound was heard by the people
about Ali, who instantly opened the box-door.

“Why, count,” exclaimed Eugénie, “what has happened to your ward? she
seems to have been taken suddenly ill.

“Very probably,” answered the count. “But do not be alarmed on her
account. Haydée’s nervous system is delicately organized, and she is
peculiarly susceptible to the odors even of flowers—nay, there are some
which cause her to faint if brought into her presence. However,”
continued Monte Cristo, drawing a small phial from his pocket, “I have
an infallible remedy.”

So saying, he bowed to the baroness and her daughter, exchanged a
parting shake of the hand with Debray and the count, and left Madame
Danglars’ box. Upon his return to Haydée he found her still very pale.
As soon as she saw him she seized his hand; her own hands were moist
and icy cold.

“Who was it you were talking with over there?” she asked.

“With the Count of Morcerf,” answered Monte Cristo. “He tells me he
served your illustrious father, and that he owes his fortune to him.”

“Wretch!” exclaimed Haydée, her eyes flashing with rage; “he sold my
father to the Turks, and the fortune he boasts of was the price of his
treachery! Did not you know that, my dear lord?”

“Something of this I heard in Epirus,” said Monte Cristo; “but the
particulars are still unknown to me. You shall relate them to me, my
child. They are, no doubt, both curious and interesting.”

“Yes, yes; but let us go. I feel as though it would kill me to remain
long near that dreadful man.”

So saying, Haydée arose, and wrapping herself in her burnouse of white
cashmere embroidered with pearls and coral, she hastily quitted the box
at the moment when the curtain was rising upon the fourth act.

“Do you observe,” said the Countess G—— to Albert, who had returned to
her side, “that man does nothing like other people; he listens most
devoutly to the third act of _Robert le Diable_, and when the fourth
begins, takes his departure.”



 Chapter 54. A Flurry in Stocks

Some days after this meeting, Albert de Morcerf visited the Count of
Monte Cristo at his house in the Champs-Élysées, which had already
assumed that palace-like appearance which the count’s princely fortune
enabled him to give even to his most temporary residences. He came to
renew the thanks of Madame Danglars which had been already conveyed to
the count through the medium of a letter, signed “Baronne Danglars,
_née_ Hermine de Servieux.”

Albert was accompanied by Lucien Debray, who, joining in his friend’s
conversation, added some passing compliments, the source of which the
count’s talent for finesse easily enabled him to guess. He was
convinced that Lucien’s visit was due to a double feeling of curiosity,
the larger half of which sentiment emanated from the Rue de la Chaussée
d’Antin. In short, Madame Danglars, not being able personally to
examine in detail the domestic economy and household arrangements of a
man who gave away horses worth 30,000 francs and who went to the opera
with a Greek slave wearing diamonds to the amount of a million of
money, had deputed those eyes, by which she was accustomed to see, to
give her a faithful account of the mode of life of this
incomprehensible person. But the count did not appear to suspect that
there could be the slightest connection between Lucien’s visit and the
curiosity of the baroness.

“You are in constant communication with the Baron Danglars?” the count
inquired of Albert de Morcerf.

“Yes, count, you know what I told you?”

“All remains the same, then, in that quarter?”

“It is more than ever a settled thing,” said L