t; you
said so yourself.”

“True. Still I remember he danced three times with her at Madame de
Morcerf’s. Do you recollect that ball, count, where you produced such
an effect?”

50121m



“No, I do not,” replied Monte Cristo, without even knowing of what or
to whom he was speaking, so much was he occupied in watching Morrel,
who was holding his breath with emotion.

“The discourse is over; farewell, gentlemen,” said the count,
unceremoniously.

And he disappeared without anyone seeing whither he went.

The funeral being over, the guests returned to Paris. Château-Renaud
looked for a moment for Morrel; but while they were watching the
departure of the count, Morrel had quitted his post, and
Château-Renaud, failing in his search, joined Debray and Beauchamp.

Monte Cristo concealed himself behind a large tomb and awaited the
arrival of Morrel, who by degrees approached the tomb now abandoned by
spectators and workmen. Morrel threw a glance around, but before it
reached the spot occupied by Monte Cristo the latter had advanced yet
nearer, still unperceived. The young man knelt down. The count, with
outstretched neck and glaring eyes, stood in an attitude ready to
pounce upon Morrel upon the first occasion. Morrel bent his head till
it touched the stone, then clutching the grating with both hands, he
murmured:

“Oh, Valentine!”

The count’s heart was pierced by the utterance of these two words; he
stepped forward, and touching the young man’s shoulder, said:

“I was looking for you, my friend.” Monte Cristo expected a burst of
passion, but he was deceived, for Morrel turning round, said calmly,—

“You see I was praying.” The scrutinizing glance of the count searched
the young man from head to foot. He then seemed more easy.

“Shall I drive you back to Paris?” he asked.

“No, thank you.”

“Do you wish anything?”

“Leave me to pray.”

The count withdrew without opposition, but it was only to place himself
in a situation where he could watch every movement of Morrel, who at
length arose, brushed the dust from his knees, and turned towards
Paris, without once looking back. He walked slowly down the Rue de la
Roquette. The count, dismissing his carriage, followed him about a
hundred paces behind. Maximilian crossed the canal and entered the Rue
Meslay by the boulevards.

Five minutes after the door had been closed on Morrel’s entrance, it
was again opened for the count. Julie was at the entrance of the
garden, where she was attentively watching Penelon, who, entering with
zeal into his profession of gardener, was very busy grafting some
Bengal roses. “Ah, count,” she exclaimed, with the delight manifested
by every member of the family whenever he visited the Rue Meslay.

“Maximilian has just returned, has he not, madame?” asked the count.

50123m



“Yes, I think I saw him pass; but pray, call Emmanuel.”

“Excuse me, madame, but I must go up to Maximilian’s room this
instant,” replied Monte Cristo, “I have something of the greatest
importance to tell him.”

“Go, then,” she said with a charming smile, which accompanied him until
he had disappeared.

Monte Cristo soon ran up the staircase conducting from the ground floor
to Maximilian’s room; when he reached the landing he listened
attentively, but all was still. Like many old houses occupied by a
single family, the room door was panelled with glass; but it was
locked, Maximilian was shut in, and it was impossible to see what was
passing in the room, because a red curtain was drawn before the glass.
The count’s anxiety was manifested by a bright color which seldom
appeared on the face of that imperturbable man.

“What shall I do!” he uttered, and reflected for a moment; “shall I
ring? No, the sound of a bell, announcing a visitor, will but
accelerate the resolution of one in Maximilian’s situation, and then
the bell would be followed by a louder noise.”

Monte Cristo trembled from head to fo