e
retirement and silence, because I can live with my thoughts and
recollections of past days. But the Count of Monte Cristo surrounds me
with every paternal care, and I am ignorant of nothing which passes in
the world. I learn all in the silence of my apartments,—for instance, I
see all the newspapers, every periodical, as well as every new piece of
music; and by thus watching the course of the life of others, I learned
what had transpired this morning in the House of Peers, and what was to
take place this evening; then I wrote.’

40204m



“‘Then,’ remarked the president, ‘the Count of Monte Cristo knows
nothing of your present proceedings?’—‘He is quite unaware of them, and
I have but one fear, which is that he should disapprove of what I have
done. But it is a glorious day for me,’ continued the young girl,
raising her ardent gaze to heaven, ‘that on which I find at last an
opportunity of avenging my father!’

“The count had not uttered one word the whole of this time. His
colleagues looked at him, and doubtless pitied his prospects, blighted
under the perfumed breath of a woman. His misery was depicted in
sinister lines on his countenance. ‘M. de Morcerf,’ said the president,
‘do you recognize this lady as the daughter of Ali Tepelini, pasha of
Yanina?’—‘No,’ said Morcerf, attempting to rise, ‘it is a base plot,
contrived by my enemies.’ Haydée, whose eyes had been fixed on the
door, as if expecting someone, turned hastily, and, seeing the count
standing, shrieked, ‘You do not know me?’ said she. ‘Well, I
fortunately recognize you! You are Fernand Mondego, the French officer
who led the troops of my noble father! It is you who surrendered the
castle of Yanina! It is you who, sent by him to Constantinople, to
treat with the emperor for the life or death of your benefactor,
brought back a false mandate granting full pardon! It is you who, with
that mandate, obtained the pasha’s ring, which gave you authority over
Selim, the fire-keeper! It is you who stabbed Selim. It is you who sold
us, my mother and me, to the merchant, El-Kobbir! Assassin, assassin,
assassin, you have still on your brow your master’s blood! Look,
gentlemen, all!’

“These words had been pronounced with such enthusiasm and evident
truth, that every eye was fixed on the count’s forehead, and he himself
passed his hand across it, as if he felt Ali’s blood still lingering
there. ‘You positively recognize M. de Morcerf as the officer, Fernand
Mondego?’—‘Indeed I do!’ cried Haydée. ‘Oh, my mother, it was you who
said, “You were free, you had a beloved father, you were destined to be
almost a queen. Look well at that man; it is he who raised your
father’s head on the point of a spear; it is he who sold us; it is he
who forsook us! Look well at his right hand, on which he has a large
wound; if you forgot his features, you would know him by that hand,
into which fell, one by one, the gold pieces of the merchant
El-Kobbir!” I know him! Ah, let him say now if he does not recognize
me!’ Each word fell like a dagger on Morcerf, and deprived him of a
portion of his energy; as she uttered the last, he hid his mutilated
hand hastily in his bosom, and fell back on his seat, overwhelmed by
wretchedness and despair. This scene completely changed the opinion of
the assembly respecting the accused count.

“‘Count of Morcerf,’ said the president, ‘do not allow yourself to be
cast down; answer. The justice of the court is supreme and impartial as
that of God; it will not suffer you to be trampled on by your enemies
without giving you an opportunity of defending yourself. Shall further
inquiries be made? Shall two members of the House be sent to Yanina?
Speak!’ Morcerf did not reply. Then all the members looked at each
other with terror. They knew the count’s energetic and violent temper;
it must be, indeed, a dreadful blow which would deprive him of courage
to defend himself. They expected that his stupefied sile