 busily occupied by the idea that a person so
intelligent, ingenious, and clear-sighted as the abbé might probably be
able to solve the dark mystery of his own misfortunes, where he himself
could see nothing.

“What are you thinking of?” asked the abbé smilingly, imputing the deep
abstraction in which his visitor was plunged to the excess of his awe
and wonder.

“I was reflecting, in the first place,” replied Dantès, “upon the
enormous degree of intelligence and ability you must have employed to
reach the high perfection to which you have attained. What would you
not have accomplished if you had been free?”

“Possibly nothing at all; the overflow of my brain would probably, in a
state of freedom, have evaporated in a thousand follies; misfortune is
needed to bring to light the treasures of the human intellect.
Compression is needed to explode gunpowder. Captivity has brought my
mental faculties to a focus; and you are well aware that from the
collision of clouds electricity is produced—from electricity,
lightning, from lightning, illumination.”

“No,” replied Dantès. “I know nothing. Some of your words are to me
quite empty of meaning. You must be blessed indeed to possess the
knowledge you have.”

The abbé smiled. “Well,” said he, “but you had another subject for your
thoughts; did you not say so just now?”

“I did!”

“You have told me as yet but one of them—let me hear the other.”

“It was this,—that while you had related to me all the particulars of
your past life, you were perfectly unacquainted with mine.”

“Your life, my young friend, has not been of sufficient length to admit
of your having passed through any very important events.”

“It has been long enough to inflict on me a great and undeserved
misfortune. I would fain fix the source of it on man that I may no
longer vent reproaches upon Heaven.”

“Then you profess ignorance of the crime with which you are charged?”

“I do, indeed; and this I swear by the two beings most dear to me upon
earth,—my father and Mercédès.”

“Come,” said the abbé, closing his hiding-place, and pushing the bed
back to its original situation, “let me hear your story.”

Dantès obeyed, and commenced what he called his history, but which
consisted only of the account of a voyage to India, and two or three
voyages to the Levant, until he arrived at the recital of his last
cruise, with the death of Captain Leclere, and the receipt of a packet
to be delivered by himself to the grand marshal; his interview with
that personage, and his receiving, in place of the packet brought, a
letter addressed to a Monsieur Noirtier—his arrival at Marseilles, and
interview with his father—his affection for Mercédès, and their nuptial
feast—his arrest and subsequent examination, his temporary detention at
the Palais de Justice, and his final imprisonment in the Château d’If.
From this point everything was a blank to Dantès—he knew nothing more,
not even the length of time he had been imprisoned. His recital
finished, the abbé reflected long and earnestly.

“There is,” said he, at the end of his meditations, “a clever maxim,
which bears upon what I was saying to you some little while ago, and
that is, that unless wicked ideas take root in a naturally depraved
mind, human nature, in a right and wholesome state, revolts at crime.
Still, from an artificial civilization have originated wants, vices,
and false tastes, which occasionally become so powerful as to stifle
within us all good feelings, and ultimately to lead us into guilt and
wickedness. From this view of things, then, comes the axiom that if you
visit to discover the author of any bad action, seek first to discover
the person to whom the perpetration of that bad action could be in any
way advantageous. Now, to apply it in your case,—to whom could your
disappearance have been serviceable?”

“To no one, by Heaven! I was a very insignificant person.”

“Do not speak thus, for your re