 second grotto.

The second grotto was lower and more gloomy than the first; the air
that could only enter by the newly formed opening had the mephitic
smell Dantès was surprised not to find in the outer cavern. He waited
in order to allow pure air to displace the foul atmosphere, and then
went on.

At the left of the opening was a dark and deep angle. But to Dantès’
eye there was no darkness. He glanced around this second grotto; it
was, like the first, empty.

The treasure, if it existed, was buried in this corner. The time had at
length arrived; two feet of earth removed, and Dantès’ fate would be
decided.

He advanced towards the angle, and summoning all his resolution,
attacked the ground with the pickaxe. At the fifth or sixth blow the
pickaxe struck against an iron substance. Never did funeral knell,
never did alarm-bell, produce a greater effect on the hearer. Had
Dantès found nothing he could not have become more ghastly pale.

He again struck his pickaxe into the earth, and encountered the same
resistance, but not the same sound.

“It is a casket of wood bound with iron,” thought he.

At this moment a shadow passed rapidly before the opening; Dantès
seized his gun, sprang through the opening, and mounted the stair. A
wild goat had passed before the mouth of the cave, and was feeding at a
little distance. This would have been a favorable occasion to secure
his dinner; but Dantès feared lest the report of his gun should attract
attention.

He thought a moment, cut a branch of a resinous tree, lighted it at the
fire at which the smugglers had prepared their breakfast, and descended
with this torch.

He wished to see everything. He approached the hole he had dug, and
now, with the aid of the torch, saw that his pickaxe had in reality
struck against iron and wood. He planted his torch in the ground and
resumed his labor.

In an instant a space three feet long by two feet broad was cleared,
and Dantès could see an oaken coffer, bound with cut steel; in the
middle of the lid he saw engraved on a silver plate, which was still
untarnished, the arms of the Spada family—viz., a sword, _en pale_, on
an oval shield, like all the Italian armorial bearings, and surmounted
by a cardinal’s hat.

Dantès easily recognized them, Faria had so often drawn them for him.
There was no longer any doubt: the treasure was there—no one would have
been at such pains to conceal an empty casket. In an instant he had
cleared every obstacle away, and he saw successively the lock, placed
between two padlocks, and the two handles at each end, all carved as
things were carved at that epoch, when art rendered the commonest
metals precious.

Dantès seized the handles, and strove to lift the coffer; it was
impossible. He sought to open it; lock and padlock were fastened; these
faithful guardians seemed unwilling to surrender their trust. Dantès
inserted the sharp end of the pickaxe between the coffer and the lid,
and pressing with all his force on the handle, burst open the
fastenings. The hinges yielded in their turn and fell, still holding in
their grasp fragments of the wood, and the chest was open.

0307m



Edmond was seized with vertigo; he cocked his gun and laid it beside
him. He then closed his eyes as children do in order that they may see
in the resplendent night of their own imagination more stars than are
visible in the firmament; then he re-opened them, and stood motionless
with amazement.

Three compartments divided the coffer. In the first, blazed piles of
golden coin; in the second, were ranged bars of unpolished gold, which
possessed nothing attractive save their value; in the third, Edmond
grasped handfuls of diamonds, pearls, and rubies, which, as they fell
on one another, sounded like hail against glass.

After having touched, felt, examined these treasures, Edmond rushed
through the caverns like a man seized with frenzy; he leaped on a rock,
from whenc