to manifest
even to guests who paid for what they took.

“From time to time Caderousse darted on his wife keen, searching
glances, but rapid as the lightning flash. The storm still continued.

“‘There, there,’ said La Carconte; ‘do you hear that? upon my word, you
did well to come back.’

“‘Nevertheless,’ replied the jeweller, ‘if by the time I have finished
my supper the tempest has at all abated, I shall make another start.’

“‘It’s the mistral,’ said Caderousse, ‘and it will be sure to last till
tomorrow morning.’ He sighed heavily.

“‘Well,’ said the jeweller, as he placed himself at table, ‘all I can
say is, so much the worse for those who are abroad.’

“‘Yes,’ chimed in La Carconte, ‘they will have a wretched night of it.’

“The jeweller began eating his supper, and the woman, who was
ordinarily so querulous and indifferent to all who approached her, was
suddenly transformed into the most smiling and attentive hostess. Had
the unhappy man on whom she lavished her assiduities been previously
acquainted with her, so sudden an alteration might well have excited
suspicion in his mind, or at least have greatly astonished him.
Caderousse, meanwhile, continued to pace the room in gloomy silence,
sedulously avoiding the sight of his guest; but as soon as the stranger
had completed his repast, the agitated innkeeper went eagerly to the
door and opened it.

“‘I believe the storm is over,’ said he.

“But as if to contradict his statement, at that instant a violent clap
of thunder seemed to shake the house to its very foundation, while a
sudden gust of wind, mingled with rain, extinguished the lamp he held
in his hand.

“Trembling and awe-struck, Caderousse hastily shut the door and
returned to his guest, while La Carconte lighted a candle by the
smouldering ashes that glimmered on the hearth.

“‘You must be tired,’ said she to the jeweller; ‘I have spread a pair
of white sheets on your bed; go up when you are ready, and sleep well.’

“Joannes stayed for a while to see whether the storm seemed to abate in
its fury, but a brief space of time sufficed to assure him that,
instead of diminishing, the violence of the rain and thunder
momentarily increased; resigning himself, therefore, to what seemed
inevitable, he bade his host good-night, and mounted the stairs. He
passed over my head and I heard the flooring creak beneath his
footsteps. The quick, eager glance of La Carconte followed him as he
ascended, while Caderousse, on the contrary, turned his back, and
seemed most anxiously to avoid even glancing at him.

“All these circumstances did not strike me as painfully at the time as
they have since done; in fact, all that had happened (with the
exception of the story of the diamond, which certainly did wear an air
of improbability), appeared natural enough, and called for neither
apprehension nor mistrust; but, worn out as I was with fatigue, and
fully purposing to proceed onwards directly the tempest abated, I
determined to obtain a few hours’ sleep. Overhead I could accurately
distinguish every movement of the jeweller, who, after making the best
arrangements in his power for passing a comfortable night, threw
himself on his bed, and I could hear it creak and groan beneath his
weight.

“Insensibly my eyelids grew heavy, deep sleep stole over me, and having
no suspicion of anything wrong, I sought not to shake it off. I looked
into the kitchen once more and saw Caderousse sitting by the side of a
long table upon one of the low wooden stools which in country places
are frequently used instead of chairs; his back was turned towards me,
so that I could not see the expression of his countenance—neither
should I have been able to do so had he been placed differently, as his
head was buried between his two hands. La Carconte continued to gaze on
him for some time, then shrugging her shoulders, she took her seat
immediately opposite to him.

“At this moment the expi