 thousand thanks for your kindness, viscount,” returned the Count of
Monte Cristo “but I suppose that M. Bertuccio has suitably employed the
four hours and a half I have given him, and that I shall find a
carriage of some sort ready at the door.”

Albert was used to the count’s manner of proceeding; he knew that, like
Nero, he was in search of the impossible, and nothing astonished him,
but wishing to judge with his own eyes how far the count’s orders had
been executed, he accompanied him to the door of the house. Monte
Cristo was not deceived. As soon as he appeared in the Count of
Morcerf’s antechamber, a footman, the same who at Rome had brought the
count’s card to the two young men, and announced his visit, sprang into
the vestibule, and when he arrived at the door the illustrious
traveller found his carriage awaiting him. It was a _coupé_ of Koller’s
building, and with horses and harness for which Drake had, to the
knowledge of all the lions of Paris, refused on the previous day seven
hundred guineas.

“Monsieur,” said the count to Albert, “I do not ask you to accompany me
to my house, as I can only show you a habitation fitted up in a hurry,
and I have, as you know, a reputation to keep up as regards not being
taken by surprise. Give me, therefore, one more day before I invite
you; I shall then be certain not to fail in my hospitality.”

“If you ask me for a day, count, I know what to anticipate; it will not
be a house I shall see, but a palace. You have decidedly some genius at
your control.”

“_Ma foi_, spread that idea,” replied the Count of Monte Cristo,
putting his foot on the velvet-lined steps of his splendid carriage,
“and that will be worth something to me among the ladies.”

As he spoke, he sprang into the vehicle, the door was closed, but not
so rapidly that Monte Cristo failed to perceive the almost
imperceptible movement which stirred the curtains of the apartment in
which he had left Madame de Morcerf.

When Albert returned to his mother, he found her in the boudoir
reclining in a large velvet armchair, the whole room so obscure that
only the shining spangle, fastened here and there to the drapery, and
the angles of the gilded frames of the pictures, showed with some
degree of brightness in the gloom. Albert could not see the face of the
countess, as it was covered with a thin veil she had put on her head,
and which fell over her features in misty folds, but it seemed to him
as though her voice had altered. He could distinguish amid the perfumes
of the roses and heliotropes in the flower-stands, the sharp and
fragrant odor of volatile salts, and he noticed in one of the chased
cups on the mantle-piece the countess’s smelling-bottle, taken from its
shagreen case, and exclaimed in a tone of uneasiness, as he entered:

“My dear mother, have you been ill during my absence?”

“No, no, Albert, but you know these roses, tuberoses, and
orange-flowers throw out at first, before one is used to them, such
violent perfumes.”

“Then, my dear mother,” said Albert, putting his hand to the bell,
“they must be taken into the antechamber. You are really ill, and just
now were so pale as you came into the room——”

“Was I pale, Albert?”

“Yes; a pallor that suits you admirably, mother, but which did not the
less alarm my father and myself.”

“Did your father speak of it?” inquired Mercédès eagerly.

“No, madame; but do you not remember that he spoke of the fact to you?”

20269m



“Yes, I do remember,” replied the countess.

A servant entered, summoned by Albert’s ring of the bell.

“Take these flowers into the anteroom or dressing-room,” said the
viscount; “they make the countess ill.”

The footman obeyed his orders. A long pause ensued, which lasted until
all the flowers were removed.

“What is this name of Monte Cristo?” inquired the countess, when the
servant had taken away the last vase of flowers, “is it a family name,
or the name of the