ess Danglars; you have seen me twenty times.”

“Possibly, madame. And now, what do you want?”

“Oh, how extraordinary! I shall complain to M. de Villefort of the
impertinence of his servants.”

“Madame, this is precaution, not impertinence; no one enters here
without an order from M. d’Avrigny, or without speaking to the
procureur.”

“Well, I have business with the procureur.”

“Is it pressing business?”

“You can imagine so, since I have not even brought my carriage out yet.
But enough of this—here is my card, take it to your master.”

“Madame will await my return?”

“Yes; go.”

The concierge closed the door, leaving Madame Danglars in the street.
She had not long to wait; directly afterwards the door was opened wide
enough to admit her, and when she had passed through, it was again
shut. Without losing sight of her for an instant, the concierge took a
whistle from his pocket as soon as they entered the court, and blew it.
The valet de chambre appeared on the door-steps.

“You will excuse this poor fellow, madame,” he said, as he preceded the
baroness, “but his orders are precise, and M. de Villefort begged me to
tell you that he could not act otherwise.”

In the court showing his merchandise, was a tradesman who had been
admitted with the same precautions. The baroness ascended the steps;
she felt herself strongly infected with the sadness which seemed to
magnify her own, and still guided by the valet de chambre, who never
lost sight of her for an instant, she was introduced to the
magistrate’s study.

Preoccupied as Madame Danglars had been with the object of her visit,
the treatment she had received from these underlings appeared to her so
insulting, that she began by complaining of it. But Villefort, raising
his head, bowed down by grief, looked up at her with so sad a smile
that her complaints died upon her lips.

“Forgive my servants,” he said, “for a terror I cannot blame them for;
from being suspected they have become suspicious.”

Madame Danglars had often heard of the terror to which the magistrate
alluded, but without the evidence of her own eyesight she could never
have believed that the sentiment had been carried so far.

“You too, then, are unhappy?” she said.

“Yes, madame,” replied the magistrate.

“Then you pity me!”

“Sincerely, madame.”

“And you understand what brings me here?”

“You wish to speak to me about the circumstance which has just
happened?”

“Yes, sir,—a fearful misfortune.”

“You mean a mischance.”

“A mischance?” repeated the baroness.

“Alas, madame,” said the procureur with his imperturbable calmness of
manner, “I consider those alone misfortunes which are irreparable.”

“And do you suppose this will be forgotten?”

“Everything will be forgotten, madame,” said Villefort. “Your daughter
will be married tomorrow, if not today—in a week, if not tomorrow; and
I do not think you can regret the intended husband of your daughter.”

Madame Danglars gazed on Villefort, stupefied to find him so almost
insultingly calm. “Am I come to a friend?” she asked in a tone full of
mournful dignity.

“You know that you are, madame,” said Villefort, whose pale cheeks
became slightly flushed as he gave her the assurance. And truly this
assurance carried him back to different events from those now occupying
the baroness and him.

“Well, then, be more affectionate, my dear Villefort,” said the
baroness. “Speak to me not as a magistrate, but as a friend; and when I
am in bitter anguish of spirit, do not tell me that I ought to be gay.”
Villefort bowed.

“When I hear misfortunes named, madame,” he said, “I have within the
last few months contracted the bad habit of thinking of my own, and
then I cannot help drawing up an egotistical parallel in my mind. That
is the reason that by the side of my misfortunes yours appear to me
mere mischances; that is why my dreadful position makes yours appear
enviable. But this annoys y