 who felt another fit coming.

“Will they never bring that emetic?” asked the doctor.

“Here is a glass with one already prepared,” said Villefort, entering
the room.

“Who prepared it?”

“The chemist who came here with me.”

40116m



“Drink it,” said the doctor to Barrois.

“Impossible, doctor; it is too late; my throat is closing up. I am
choking! Oh, my heart! Ah, my head!—Oh, what agony!—Shall I suffer like
this long?”

“No, no, friend,” replied the doctor, “you will soon cease to suffer.”

“Ah, I understand you,” said the unhappy man. “My God, have mercy upon
me!” and, uttering a fearful cry, Barrois fell back as if he had been
struck by lightning. D’Avrigny put his hand to his heart, and placed a
glass before his lips.

“Well?” said Villefort.

“Go to the kitchen and get me some syrup of violets.”

Villefort went immediately.

“Do not be alarmed, M. Noirtier,” said d’Avrigny; “I am going to take
my patient into the next room to bleed him; this sort of attack is very
frightful to witness.”

And taking Barrois under the arms, he dragged him into an adjoining
room; but almost immediately he returned to fetch the lemonade.
Noirtier closed his right eye.

“You want Valentine, do you not? I will tell them to send her to you.”

Villefort returned, and d’Avrigny met him in the passage.

“Well, how is he now?” asked he.

“Come in here,” said d’Avrigny, and he took him into the chamber where
the sick man lay.

“Is he still in a fit?” said the procureur.

“He is dead.”

Villefort drew back a few steps, and, clasping his hands, exclaimed,
with real amazement and sympathy, “Dead?—and so soon too!”

“Yes, it is very soon,” said the doctor, looking at the corpse before
him; “but that ought not to astonish you; Monsieur and Madame de
Saint-Méran died as soon. People die very suddenly in your house, M. de
Villefort.”

“What?” cried the magistrate, with an accent of horror and
consternation, “are you still harping on that terrible idea?”

“Still, sir; and I shall always do so,” replied d’Avrigny, “for it has
never for one instant ceased to retain possession of my mind; and that
you may be quite sure I am not mistaken this time, listen well to what
I am going to say, M. de Villefort.”

The magistrate trembled convulsively.

“There is a poison which destroys life almost without leaving any
perceptible traces. I know it well; I have studied it in all its forms
and in the effects which it produces. I recognized the presence of this
poison in the case of poor Barrois as well as in that of Madame de
Saint-Méran. There is a way of detecting its presence. It restores the
blue color of litmus-paper reddened by an acid, and it turns syrup of
violets green. We have no litmus-paper, but, see, here they come with
the syrup of violets.”

The doctor was right; steps were heard in the passage. M. d’Avrigny
opened the door, and took from the hands of the chambermaid a cup which
contained two or three spoonfuls of the syrup, he then carefully closed
the door.

“Look,” said he to the procureur, whose heart beat so loudly that it
might almost be heard, “here is in this cup some syrup of violets, and
this decanter contains the remainder of the lemonade of which M.
Noirtier and Barrois partook. If the lemonade be pure and inoffensive,
the syrup will retain its color; if, on the contrary, the lemonade be
drugged with poison, the syrup will become green. Look closely!”

The doctor then slowly poured some drops of the lemonade from the
decanter into the cup, and in an instant a light cloudy sediment began
to form at the bottom of the cup; this sediment first took a blue
shade, then from the color of sapphire it passed to that of opal, and
from opal to emerald. Arrived at this last hue, it changed no more. The
result of the experiment left no doubt whatever on the mind.

“The unfortunate Barrois has been poisoned,” said d’Avrigny, “and I
will maintain this assert