ill not constrain you to
help us; we enroll no one against his conscience, but we will compel
you to act generously, even if you are not disposed to do so.”

“‘“You would call acting generously, knowing your conspiracy and not
informing against you, that is what I should call becoming your
accomplice. You see I am more candid than you.”’”

“Ah, my father!” said Franz, interrupting himself. “I understand now
why they murdered him.” Valentine could not help casting one glance
towards the young man, whose filial enthusiasm it was delightful to
behold. Villefort walked to and fro behind them. Noirtier watched the
expression of each one, and preserved his dignified and commanding
attitude. Franz returned to the manuscript, and continued:

“‘“Sir,” said the president, “you have been invited to join this
assembly—you were not forced here; it was proposed to you to come
blindfolded—you accepted. When you complied with this twofold request
you well knew we did not wish to secure the throne of Louis XVIII., or
we should not take so much care to avoid the vigilance of the police.
It would be conceding too much to allow you to put on a mask to aid you
in the discovery of our secret, and then to remove it that you may ruin
those who have confided in you. No, no, you must first say if you
declare yourself for the king of a day who now reigns, or for his
majesty the emperor.”

“‘“I am a royalist,” replied the general; “I have taken the oath of
allegiance to Louis XVIII., and I will adhere to it.” These words were
followed by a general murmur, and it was evident that several of the
members were discussing the propriety of making the general repent of
his rashness.

“‘The president again arose, and having imposed silence, said,—“Sir,
you are too serious and too sensible a man not to understand the
consequences of our present situation, and your candor has already
dictated to us the conditions which remain for us to offer you.” The
general, putting his hand on his sword, exclaimed,—“If you talk of
honor, do not begin by disavowing its laws, and impose nothing by
violence.”

“‘“And you, sir,” continued the president, with a calmness still more
terrible than the general’s anger, “I advise you not to touch your
sword.” The general looked around him with slight uneasiness; however
he did not yield, but calling up all his fortitude, said,—“I will not
swear.”

“‘“Then you must die,” replied the president calmly. M. d’Épinay became
very pale; he looked round him a second time, several members of the
club were whispering, and getting their arms from under their cloaks.
“General,” said the president, “do not alarm yourself; you are among
men of honor who will use every means to convince you before resorting
to the last extremity, but as you have said, you are among
conspirators, you are in possession of our secret, and you must restore
it to us.” A significant silence followed these words, and as the
general did not reply,—“Close the doors,” said the president to the
door-keeper.

40042m



“‘The same deadly silence succeeded these words. Then the general
advanced, and making a violent effort to control his feelings,—“I have
a son,” said he, “and I ought to think of him, finding myself among
assassins.”

“‘“General,” said the chief of the assembly, “one man may insult
fifty—it is the privilege of weakness. But he does wrong to use his
privilege. Follow my advice, swear, and do not insult.” The general,
again daunted by the superiority of the chief, hesitated a moment; then
advancing to the president’s desk,—“What is the form, said he.

“‘“It is this:—‘I swear by my honor not to reveal to anyone what I have
seen and heard on the 5th of February, 1815, between nine and ten
o’clock in the evening; and I plead guilty of death should I ever
violate this oath.’” The general appeared to be affected by a nervous
tremor, which prevented his answering for some moments; then,
overcoming h