 less happy on that account.”

“Still that idea of death, madame,” said Villefort.

“Still?—Always! I tell you I am going to die—do you understand? Well,
before dying, I wish to see my son-in-law. I wish to tell him to make
my child happy; I wish to read in his eyes whether he intends to obey
me;—in fact, I will know him—I will!” continued the old lady, with a
fearful expression, “that I may rise from the depths of my grave to
find him, if he should not fulfil his duty!”

“Madame,” said Villefort, “you must lay aside these exalted ideas,
which almost assume the appearance of madness. The dead, once buried in
their graves, rise no more.”

“And I tell you, sir, that you are mistaken. This night I have had a
fearful sleep. It seemed as though my soul were already hovering over
my body, my eyes, which I tried to open, closed against my will, and
what will appear impossible above all to you, sir, I saw, with my eyes
shut, in the spot where you are now standing, issuing from that corner
where there is a door leading into Madame Villefort’s dressing-room—I
saw, I tell you, silently enter, a white figure.”

Valentine screamed.

“It was the fever that disturbed you, madame,” said Villefort.

30321m



“Doubt, if you please, but I am sure of what I say. I saw a white
figure, and as if to prevent my discrediting the testimony of only one
of my senses, I heard my glass removed—the same which is there now on
the table.”

“Oh, dear mother, it was a dream.”

“So little was it a dream, that I stretched my hand towards the bell;
but when I did so, the shade disappeared; my maid then entered with a
light.”

“But she saw no one?”

“Phantoms are visible to those only who ought to see them. It was the
soul of my husband!—Well, if my husband’s soul can come to me, why
should not my soul reappear to guard my granddaughter? the tie is even
more direct, it seems to me.”

“Oh, madame,” said Villefort, deeply affected, in spite of himself, “do
not yield to those gloomy thoughts; you will long live with us, happy,
loved, and honored, and we will make you forget——”

“Never, never, never,” said the marchioness. “When does M. d’Épinay
return?”

“We expect him every moment.”

“It is well. As soon as he arrives inform me. We must be expeditious.
And then I also wish to see a notary, that I may be assured that all
our property returns to Valentine.”

“Ah, grandmamma,” murmured Valentine, pressing her lips on the burning
brow, “do you wish to kill me? Oh, how feverish you are; we must not
send for a notary, but for a doctor!”

“A doctor?” said she, shrugging her shoulders, “I am not ill; I am
thirsty—that is all.”

30323m



“What are you drinking, dear grandmamma?”

“The same as usual, my dear, my glass is there on the table—give it to
me, Valentine.” Valentine poured the orangeade into a glass and gave it
to her grandmother with a certain degree of dread, for it was the same
glass she fancied that had been touched by the spectre.

The marchioness drained the glass at a single draught, and then turned
on her pillow, repeating,

“The notary, the notary!”

M. de Villefort left the room, and Valentine seated herself at the
bedside of her grandmother. The poor child appeared herself to require
the doctor she had recommended to her aged relative. A bright spot
burned in either cheek, her respiration was short and difficult, and
her pulse beat with feverish excitement. She was thinking of the
despair of Maximilian, when he should be informed that Madame de
Saint-Méran, instead of being an ally, was unconsciously acting as his
enemy.

More than once she thought of revealing all to her grandmother, and she
would not have hesitated a moment, if Maximilian Morrel had been named
Albert de Morcerf or Raoul de Château-Renaud; but Morrel was of
plebeian extraction, and Valentine knew how the haughty Marquise de
Saint-Méran despised all who were not noble. Her secret had each ti