e obeyed. Five minutes after, Andrea left the hotel, completely
disguised, took a cabriolet, and ordered the driver to take him to the
Cheval Rouge, at Picpus. The next morning he left that inn as he had
left the Hôtel des Princes, without being noticed, walked down the
Faubourg Saint-Antoine, along the boulevard to Rue Ménilmontant, and
stopping at the door of the third house on the left looked for someone
of whom to make inquiry in the porter’s absence.

“For whom are you looking, my fine fellow?” asked the fruiteress on the
opposite side.

“Monsieur Pailletin, if you please, my good woman,” replied Andrea.

“A retired baker?” asked the fruiteress.

“Exactly.”

“He lives at the end of the yard, on the left, on the third story.”

40132m



Andrea went as she directed him, and on the third floor he found a
hare’s paw, which, by the hasty ringing of the bell, it was evident he
pulled with considerable ill-temper. A moment after Caderousse’s face
appeared at the grating in the door.

“Ah! you are punctual,” said he, as he drew back the door.

“Confound you and your punctuality!” said Andrea, throwing himself into
a chair in a manner which implied that he would rather have flung it at
the head of his host.

“Come, come, my little fellow, don’t be angry. See, I have thought
about you—look at the good breakfast we are going to have; nothing but
what you are fond of.”

Andrea, indeed, inhaled the scent of something cooking which was not
unwelcome to him, hungry as he was; it was that mixture of fat and
garlic peculiar to Provençal kitchens of an inferior order, added to
that of dried fish, and above all, the pungent smell of musk and
cloves. These odors escaped from two deep dishes which were covered and
placed on a stove, and from a copper pan placed in an old iron pot. In
an adjoining room Andrea saw also a tolerably clean table prepared for
two, two bottles of wine sealed, the one with green, the other with
yellow, a supply of brandy in a decanter, and a measure of fruit in a
cabbage-leaf, cleverly arranged on an earthenware plate.

“What do you think of it, my little fellow?” said Caderousse. “Ay, that
smells good! You know I used to be a good cook; do you recollect how
you used to lick your fingers? You were among the first who tasted any
of my dishes, and I think you relished them tolerably.” While speaking,
Caderousse went on peeling a fresh supply of onions.

“But,” said Andrea, ill-temperedly, “by my faith, if it was only to
breakfast with you, that you disturbed me, I wish the devil had taken
you!”

“My boy,” said Caderousse sententiously, “one can talk while eating.
And then, you ungrateful being, you are not pleased to see an old
friend? I am weeping with joy.”

He was truly crying, but it would have been difficult to say whether
joy or the onions produced the greatest effect on the lachrymal glands
of the old innkeeper of the Pont-du-Gard.

“Hold your tongue, hypocrite,” said Andrea; “you love me!”

“Yes, I do, or may the devil take me. I know it is a weakness,” said
Caderousse, “but it overpowers me.”

“And yet it has not prevented your sending for me to play me some
trick.”

“Come,” said Caderousse, wiping his large knife on his apron, “if I did
not like you, do you think I should endure the wretched life you lead
me? Think for a moment. You have your servant’s clothes on—you
therefore keep a servant; I have none, and am obliged to prepare my own
meals. You abuse my cookery because you dine at the table d’hôte of the
Hôtel des Princes, or the Café de Paris. Well, I too could keep a
servant; I too could have a tilbury; I too could dine where I like; but
why do I not? Because I would not annoy my little Benedetto. Come, just
acknowledge that I could, eh?”

This address was accompanied by a look which was by no means difficult
to understand.

“Well,” said Andrea, “admitting your love, why do you want me to
breakfast with you?”

“Th