 met Barrois, and looked despairingly at the old servant. A
moment later, Madame de Villefort entered the drawing-room with her
little Edward. It was evident that she had shared the grief of the
family, for she was pale and looked fatigued. She sat down, took Edward
on her knees, and from time to time pressed this child, on whom her
affections appeared centred, almost convulsively to her bosom.

Two carriages were soon heard to enter the courtyard. One was the
notary’s; the other, that of Franz and his friends. In a moment the
whole party was assembled. Valentine was so pale one might trace the
blue veins from her temples, round her eyes and down her cheeks. Franz
was deeply affected. Château-Renaud and Albert looked at each other
with amazement; the ceremony which was just concluded had not appeared
more sorrowful than did that which was about to begin. Madame de
Villefort had placed herself in the shadow behind a velvet curtain, and
as she constantly bent over her child, it was difficult to read the
expression of her face. M. de Villefort was, as usual, unmoved.

The notary, after having, according to the customary method, arranged
the papers on the table, taken his place in an armchair, and raised his
spectacles, turned towards Franz:

“Are you M. Franz de Quesnel, baron d’Épinay?” asked he, although he
knew it perfectly.

“Yes, sir,” replied Franz. The notary bowed.

“I have, then, to inform you, sir, at the request of M. de Villefort,
that your projected marriage with Mademoiselle de Villefort has changed
the feeling of M. Noirtier towards his grandchild, and that he
disinherits her entirely of the fortune he would have left her. Let me
hasten to add,” continued he, “that the testator, having only the right
to alienate a part of his fortune, and having alienated it all, the
will will not bear scrutiny, and is declared null and void.”

“Yes.” said Villefort; “but I warn M. d’Épinay, that during my
life-time my father’s will shall never be questioned, my position
forbidding any doubt to be entertained.”

40032m



“Sir,” said Franz, “I regret much that such a question has been raised
in the presence of Mademoiselle Valentine; I have never inquired the
amount of her fortune, which, however limited it may be, exceeds mine.
My family has sought consideration in this alliance with M. de
Villefort; all I seek is happiness.”

Valentine imperceptibly thanked him, while two silent tears rolled down
her cheeks.

“Besides, sir,” said Villefort, addressing himself to his future
son-in-law, “excepting the loss of a portion of your hopes, this
unexpected will need not personally wound you; M. Noirtier’s weakness
of mind sufficiently explains it. It is not because Mademoiselle
Valentine is going to marry you that he is angry, but because she will
marry, a union with any other would have caused him the same sorrow.
Old age is selfish, sir, and Mademoiselle de Villefort has been a
faithful companion to M. Noirtier, which she cannot be when she becomes
the Baroness d’Épinay. My father’s melancholy state prevents our
speaking to him on any subjects, which the weakness of his mind would
incapacitate him from understanding, and I am perfectly convinced that
at the present time, although, he knows that his granddaughter is going
to be married, M. Noirtier has even forgotten the name of his intended
grandson.” M. de Villefort had scarcely said this, when the door
opened, and Barrois appeared.

“Gentlemen,” said he, in a tone strangely firm for a servant speaking
to his masters under such solemn circumstances,—“gentlemen, M. Noirtier
de Villefort wishes to speak immediately to M. Franz de Quesnel, baron
d’Épinay.” He, as well as the notary, that there might be no mistake in
the person, gave all his titles to the bridegroom elect.

Villefort started, Madame de Villefort let her son slip from her knees,
Valentine rose, pale and dumb as a statue. Albert and Château-Renaud
ex