him all the psychological studies he was
accustomed to use, in vain endeavored to make him lower his eyes,
notwithstanding the depth and profundity of his gaze. At length the
reading of the indictment was ended.

“Accused,” said the president, “your name and surname?”

Andrea arose.

“Excuse me, Mr. President,” he said, in a clear voice, “but I see you
are going to adopt a course of questions through which I cannot follow
you. I have an idea, which I will explain by and by, of making an
exception to the usual form of accusation. Allow me, then, if you
please, to answer in different order, or I will not do so at all.”

The astonished president looked at the jury, who in turn looked at
Villefort. The whole assembly manifested great surprise, but Andrea
appeared quite unmoved.

“Your age?” said the president; “will you answer that question?”

“I will answer that question, as well as the rest, Mr. President, but
in its turn.”

“Your age?” repeated the president.

“I am twenty-one years old, or rather I shall be in a few days, as I
was born the night of the 27th of September, 1817.”

M. de Villefort, who was busy taking down some notes, raised his head
at the mention of this date.

“Where were you born?” continued the president.

“At Auteuil, near Paris.”

M. de Villefort a second time raised his head, looked at Benedetto as
if he had been gazing at the head of Medusa, and became livid. As for
Benedetto, he gracefully wiped his lips with a fine cambric
pocket-handkerchief.

“Your profession?”

“First I was a forger,” answered Andrea, as calmly as possible; “then I
became a thief, and lately have become an assassin.”

A murmur, or rather storm, of indignation burst from all parts of the
assembly. The judges themselves appeared to be stupefied, and the jury
manifested tokens of disgust for a cynicism so unexpected in a man of
fashion. M. de Villefort pressed his hand upon his brow, which, at
first pale, had become red and burning; then he suddenly arose and
looked around as though he had lost his senses—he wanted air.

50183m



“Are you looking for anything, Mr. Procureur?” asked Benedetto, with
his most ingratiating smile.

M. de Villefort answered nothing, but sat, or rather threw himself down
again upon his chair.

“And now, prisoner, will you consent to tell your name?” said the
president. “The brutal affectation with which you have enumerated and
classified your crimes calls for a severe reprimand on the part of the
court, both in the name of morality, and for the respect due to
humanity. You appear to consider this a point of honor, and it may be
for this reason, that you have delayed acknowledging your name. You
wished it to be preceded by all these titles.”

“It is quite wonderful, Mr. President, how entirely you have read my
thoughts,” said Benedetto, in his softest voice and most polite manner.
“This is, indeed, the reason why I begged you to alter the order of the
questions.”

The public astonishment had reached its height. There was no longer any
deceit or bravado in the manner of the accused. The audience felt that
a startling revelation was to follow this ominous prelude.

“Well,” said the president; “your name?”

“I cannot tell you my name, since I do not know it; but I know my
father’s, and can tell it to you.”

A painful giddiness overwhelmed Villefort; great drops of acrid sweat
fell from his face upon the papers which he held in his convulsed hand.

“Repeat your father’s name,” said the president.

Not a whisper, not a breath, was heard in that vast assembly; everyone
waited anxiously.

“My father is king’s attorney,” replied Andrea calmly.

50179m



“King’s attorney?” said the president, stupefied, and without noticing
the agitation which spread over the face of M. de Villefort; “king’s
attorney?”

“Yes; and if you wish to know his name, I will tell it,—he is named
Villefort.”

The explosion, which had been 