unch of violets; it was his token reserved for the morrow.

The two friends sat down to table; but they could not refrain from
remarking the difference between the Count of Monte Cristo’s table and
that of Signor Pastrini. Truth compelled Franz, in spite of the dislike
he seemed to have taken to the count, to confess that the advantage was
not on Pastrini’s side. During dessert, the servant inquired at what
time they wished for the carriage. Albert and Franz looked at each
other, fearing really to abuse the count’s kindness. The servant
understood them.

“His excellency the Count of Monte Cristo had,” he said, “given
positive orders that the carriage was to remain at their lordships’
orders all day, and they could therefore dispose of it without fear of
indiscretion.”

They resolved to profit by the count’s courtesy, and ordered the horses
to be harnessed, while they substituted evening dress for that which
they had on, and which was somewhat the worse for the numerous combats
they had sustained.

20181m



This precaution taken, they went to the theatre, and installed
themselves in the count’s box. During the first act, the Countess G——
entered. Her first look was at the box where she had seen the count the
previous evening, so that she perceived Franz and Albert in the place
of the very person concerning whom she had expressed so strange an
opinion to Franz. Her opera-glass was so fixedly directed towards them,
that Franz saw it would be cruel not to satisfy her curiosity; and,
availing himself of one of the privileges of the spectators of the
Italian theatres, who use their boxes to hold receptions, the two
friends went to pay their respects to the countess. Scarcely had they
entered, when she motioned to Franz to assume the seat of honor.
Albert, in his turn, sat behind.

“Well,” said she, hardly giving Franz time to sit down, “it seems you
have nothing better to do than to make the acquaintance of this new
Lord Ruthven, and you are already the best friends in the world.”

“Without being so far advanced as that, my dear countess,” returned
Franz, “I cannot deny that we have abused his good nature all day.”

“All day?”

“Yes; this morning we breakfasted with him; we rode in his carriage all
day, and now we have taken possession of his box.”

“You know him, then?”

“Yes, and no.”

“How so?”

“It is a long story.”

“Tell it to me.”

“It would frighten you too much.”

“So much the more reason.”

“At least wait until the story has a conclusion.”

“Very well; I prefer complete histories; but tell me how you made his
acquaintance? Did anyone introduce you to him?”

“No; it was he who introduced himself to us.”

“When?”

“Last night, after we left you.”

“Through what medium?”

“The very prosaic one of our landlord.”

“He is staying, then, at the Hôtel de Londres with you?”

“Not only in the same hotel, but on the same floor.”

“What is his name; for, of course, you know?”

“The Count of Monte Cristo.”

“That is not a family name?”

“No, it is the name of the island he has purchased.”

“And he is a count?”

“A Tuscan count.”

“Well, we must put up with that,” said the countess, who was herself
from one of the oldest Venetian families. “What sort of a man is he?”

“Ask the Vicomte de Morcerf.”

“You hear, M. de Morcerf, I am referred to you,” said the countess.

“We should be very hard to please, madam,” returned Albert, “did we not
think him delightful. A friend of ten years’ standing could not have
done more for us, or with a more perfect courtesy.”

“Come,” observed the countess, smiling, “I see my vampire is only some
millionaire, who has taken the appearance of Lara in order to avoid
being confounded with M. de Rothschild; and you have seen her?”

“Her?”

20183m



“The beautiful Greek of yesterday.”

“No; we heard, I think, the sound of her _guzla_, but she remained
perfectly invisible.”

“When you say invi