ere, and my presence had the
effect of rendering you unjust in your comparison.”

“No; but tell me—it is a question of simple curiosity, and which was
suggested by certain ideas passing in my mind relative to Mademoiselle
Danglars——”

“I dare say it is something disparaging which you are going to say. It
only proves how little indulgence we may expect from your sex,”
interrupted Valentine.

“You cannot, at least, deny that you are very harsh judges of each
other.”

“If we are so, it is because we generally judge under the influence of
excitement. But return to your question.”

30151m



“Does Mademoiselle Danglars object to this marriage with M. de Morcerf
on account of loving another?”

“I told you I was not on terms of strict intimacy with Eugénie.”

“Yes, but girls tell each other secrets without being particularly
intimate; own, now, that you did question her on the subject. Ah, I see
you are smiling.”

“If you are already aware of the conversation that passed, the wooden
partition which interposed between us and you has proved but a slight
security.”

“Come, what did she say?”

“She told me that she loved no one,” said Valentine; “that she disliked
the idea of being married; that she would infinitely prefer leading an
independent and unfettered life; and that she almost wished her father
might lose his fortune, that she might become an artist, like her
friend, Mademoiselle Louise d’Armilly.”

“Ah, you see——”

“Well, what does that prove?” asked Valentine.

“Nothing,” replied Maximilian.

“Then why did you smile?”

“Why, you know very well that you are reflecting on yourself,
Valentine.”

“Do you want me to go away?”

“Ah, no, no. But do not let us lose time; you are the subject on which
I wish to speak.”

“True, we must be quick, for we have scarcely ten minutes more to pass
together.”

“_Ma foi!_” said Maximilian, in consternation.

“Yes, you are right; I am but a poor friend to you. What a life I cause
you to lead, poor Maximilian, you who are formed for happiness! I
bitterly reproach myself, I assure you.”

“Well, what does it signify, Valentine, so long as I am satisfied, and
feel that even this long and painful suspense is amply repaid by five
minutes of your society, or two words from your lips? And I have also a
deep conviction that heaven would not have created two hearts,
harmonizing as ours do, and almost miraculously brought us together, to
separate us at last.”

“Those are kind and cheering words. You must hope for us both,
Maximilian; that will make me at least partly happy.”

“But why must you leave me so soon?”

“I do not know particulars. I can only tell you that Madame de
Villefort sent to request my presence, as she had a communication to
make on which a part of my fortune depended. Let them take my fortune,
I am already too rich; and, perhaps, when they have taken it, they will
leave me in peace and quietness. You would love me as much if I were
poor, would you not, Maximilian?”

“Oh, I shall always love you. What should I care for either riches or
poverty, if my Valentine was near me, and I felt certain that no one
could deprive me of her? But do you not fear that this communication
may relate to your marriage?”

“I do not think that is the case.”

“However it may be, Valentine, you must not be alarmed. I assure you
that, as long as I live, I shall never love anyone else!”

“Do you think to reassure me when you say that, Maximilian?”

“Pardon me, you are right. I am a brute. But I was going to tell you
that I met M. de Morcerf the other day.”

“Well?”

“Monsieur Franz is his friend, you know.”

“What then?”

“Monsieur de Morcerf has received a letter from Franz, announcing his
immediate return.” Valentine turned pale, and leaned her hand against
the gate.

“Ah heavens, if it were that! But no, the communication would not come
through Madame de Villefort.”

“Why not?”

“Because—I scarcely 