 home to your own good house and to your
country. But as heaven has put it in your mind to speak of it, tell me
about the task that lies before you. I shall have to hear about it
later, so it is better that I should be told at once.”

“My dear,” answered Ulysses, “why should you press me to tell you?
Still, I will not conceal it from you, though you will not like it. I
do not like it myself, for Teiresias bade me travel far and wide,
carrying an oar, till I came to a country where the people have never
heard of the sea, and do not even mix salt with their food. They know
nothing about ships, nor oars that are as the wings of a ship. He gave
me this certain token which I will not hide from you. He said that a
wayfarer should meet me and ask me whether it was a winnowing shovel
that I had on my shoulder. On this, I was to fix my oar in the ground
and sacrifice a ram, a bull, and a boar to Neptune; after which I was
to go home and offer hecatombs to all the gods in heaven, one after the
other. As for myself, he said that death should come to me from the
sea, and that my life should ebb away very gently when I was full of
years and peace of mind, and my people should bless me. All this, he
said, should surely come to pass.”

And Penelope said, “If the gods are going to vouchsafe you a happier
time in your old age, you may hope then to have some respite from
misfortune.”

Thus did they converse. Meanwhile Eurynome and the nurse took torches
and made the bed ready with soft coverlets; as soon as they had laid
them, the nurse went back into the house to go to her rest, leaving the
bed chamber woman Eurynome183 to show Ulysses and Penelope to bed by
torch light. When she had conducted them to their room she went back,
and they then came joyfully to the rites of their own old bed.
Telemachus, Philoetius, and the swineherd now left off dancing, and
made the women leave off also. They then laid themselves down to sleep
in the cloisters.

When Ulysses and Penelope had had their fill of love they fell talking
with one another. She told him how much she had had to bear in seeing
the house filled with a crowd of wicked suitors who had killed so many
sheep and oxen on her account, and had drunk so many casks of wine.
Ulysses in his turn told her what he had suffered, and how much trouble
he had himself given to other people. He told her everything, and she
was so delighted to listen that she never went to sleep till he had
ended his whole story.

He began with his victory over the Cicons, and how he thence reached
the fertile land of the Lotus-eaters. He told her all about the Cyclops
and how he had punished him for having so ruthlessly eaten his brave
comrades; how he then went on to Aeolus, who received him hospitably
and furthered him on his way, but even so he was not to reach home, for
to his great grief a hurricane carried him out to sea again; how he
went on to the Laestrygonian city Telepylos, where the people destroyed
all his ships with their crews, save himself and his own ship only.
Then he told of cunning Circe and her craft, and how he sailed to the
chill house of Hades, to consult the ghost of the Theban prophet
Teiresias, and how he saw his old comrades in arms, and his mother who
bore him and brought him up when he was a child; how he then heard the
wondrous singing of the Sirens, and went on to the wandering rocks and
terrible Charybdis and to Scylla, whom no man had ever yet passed in
safety; how his men then ate the cattle of the sun-god, and how Jove
therefore struck the ship with his thunderbolts, so that all his men
perished together, himself alone being left alive; how at last he
reached the Ogygian island and the nymph Calypso, who kept him there in
a cave, and fed him, and wanted him to marry her, in which case she
intended making him immortal so that he should never grow old, but she
could not persuade him to let her do so; and how after much suffering