ide.

At this moment the bow was in the hands of Eurymachus, who was warming
it by the fire, but even so he could not string it, and he was greatly
grieved. He heaved a deep sigh and said, “I grieve for myself and for
us all; I grieve that I shall have to forgo the marriage, but I do not
care nearly so much about this, for there are plenty of other women in
Ithaca and elsewhere; what I feel most is the fact of our being so
inferior to Ulysses in strength that we cannot string his bow. This
will disgrace us in the eyes of those who are yet unborn.”

“It shall not be so, Eurymachus,” said Antinous, “and you know it
yourself. Today is the feast of Apollo throughout all the land; who can
string a bow on such a day as this? Put it on one side—as for the axes
they can stay where they are, for no one is likely to come to the house
and take them away: let the cupbearer go round with his cups, that we
may make our drink-offerings and drop this matter of the bow; we will
tell Melanthius to bring us in some goats tomorrow—the best he has; we
can then offer thigh bones to Apollo the mighty archer, and again make
trial of the bow, so as to bring the contest to an end.”

The rest approved his words, and thereon men servants poured water over
the hands of the guests, while pages filled the mixing-bowls with wine
and water and handed it round after giving every man his
drink-offering. Then, when they had made their offerings and had drunk
each as much as he desired, Ulysses craftily said:—

“Suitors of the illustrious queen, listen that I may speak even as I am
minded. I appeal more especially to Eurymachus, and to Antinous who has
just spoken with so much reason. Cease shooting for the present and
leave the matter to the gods, but in the morning let heaven give
victory to whom it will. For the moment, however, give me the bow that
I may prove the power of my hands among you all, and see whether I
still have as much strength as I used to have, or whether travel and
neglect have made an end of it.”

This made them all very angry, for they feared he might string the bow,
Antinous therefore rebuked him fiercely saying, “Wretched creature, you
have not so much as a grain of sense in your whole body; you ought to
think yourself lucky in being allowed to dine unharmed among your
betters, without having any smaller portion served you than we others
have had, and in being allowed to hear our conversation. No other
beggar or stranger has been allowed to hear what we say among
ourselves; the wine must have been doing you a mischief, as it does
with all those who drink immoderately. It was wine that inflamed the
Centaur Eurytion when he was staying with Peirithous among the
Lapithae. When the wine had got into his head, he went mad and did ill
deeds about the house of Peirithous; this angered the heroes who were
there assembled, so they rushed at him and cut off his ears and
nostrils; then they dragged him through the doorway out of the house,
so he went away crazed, and bore the burden of his crime, bereft of
understanding. Henceforth, therefore, there was war between mankind and
the centaurs, but he brought it upon himself through his own
drunkenness. In like manner I can tell you that it will go hardly with
you if you string the bow: you will find no mercy from any one here,
for we shall at once ship you off to king Echetus, who kills every one
that comes near him: you will never get away alive, so drink and keep
quiet without getting into a quarrel with men younger than yourself.”

Penelope then spoke to him. “Antinous,” said she, “it is not right that
you should ill-treat any guest of Telemachus who comes to this house.
If the stranger should prove strong enough to string the mighty bow of
Ulysses, can you suppose that he would take me home with him and make
me his wife? Even the man himself can have no such idea in his mind:
none of you need let that disturb his feasting; it would be 