 possible
manner; but some of these, like clever rogues, have contrived to escape
human justice, and succeed in their fraudulent enterprises by cunning
stratagems. Amongst us a simpleton, possessed by the demon of hate or
cupidity, who has an enemy to destroy, or some near relation to dispose
of, goes straight to the grocer’s or druggist’s, gives a false name,
which leads more easily to his detection than his real one, and under
the pretext that the rats prevent him from sleeping, purchases five or
six grammes of arsenic—if he is really a cunning fellow, he goes to
five or six different druggists or grocers, and thereby becomes only
five or six times more easily traced;—then, when he has acquired his
specific, he administers duly to his enemy, or near kinsman, a dose of
arsenic which would make a mammoth or mastodon burst, and which,
without rhyme or reason, makes his victim utter groans which alarm the
entire neighborhood. Then arrive a crowd of policemen and constables.
They fetch a doctor, who opens the dead body, and collects from the
entrails and stomach a quantity of arsenic in a spoon. Next day a
hundred newspapers relate the fact, with the names of the victim and
the murderer. The same evening the grocer or grocers, druggist or
druggists, come and say, ‘It was I who sold the arsenic to the
gentleman;’ and rather than not recognize the guilty purchaser, they
will recognize twenty. Then the foolish criminal is taken, imprisoned,
interrogated, confronted, confounded, condemned, and cut off by hemp or
steel; or if she be a woman of any consideration, they lock her up for
life. This is the way in which you Northerns understand chemistry,
madame. Desrues was, however, I must confess, more skilful.”

“What would you have, sir?” said the lady, laughing; “we do what we
can. All the world has not the secret of the Medicis or the Borgias.”

“Now,” replied the count, shrugging his shoulders, “shall I tell you
the cause of all these stupidities? It is because, at your theatres, by
what at least I could judge by reading the pieces they play, they see
persons swallow the contents of a phial, or suck the button of a ring,
and fall dead instantly. Five minutes afterwards the curtain falls, and
the spectators depart. They are ignorant of the consequences of the
murder; they see neither the police commissary with his badge of
office, nor the corporal with his four men; and so the poor fools
believe that the whole thing is as easy as lying. But go a little way
from France—go either to Aleppo or Cairo, or only to Naples or Rome,
and you will see people passing by you in the streets—people erect,
smiling, and fresh-colored, of whom Asmodeus, if you were holding on by
the skirt of his mantle, would say, ‘That man was poisoned three weeks
ago; he will be a dead man in a month.’”

“Then,” remarked Madame de Villefort, “they have again discovered the
secret of the famous _aqua Tofana_ that they said was lost at Perugia.”

“Ah, but madame, does mankind ever lose anything? The arts change about
and make a tour of the world; things take a different name, and the
vulgar do not follow them—that is all; but there is always the same
result. Poisons act particularly on some organ or another—one on the
stomach, another on the brain, another on the intestines. Well, the
poison brings on a cough, the cough an inflammation of the lungs, or
some other complaint catalogued in the book of science, which, however,
by no means precludes it from being decidedly mortal; and if it were
not, would be sure to become so, thanks to the remedies applied by
foolish doctors, who are generally bad chemists, and which will act in
favor of or against the malady, as you please; and then there is a
human being killed according to all the rules of art and skill, and of
whom justice learns nothing, as was said by a terrible chemist of my
acquaintance, the worthy Abbé Adelmonte of Taormina, in Sicily, who has
studied 