ung man, about your own age, viscount,
bearing the same title as yourself, and who is making his entry into
the Parisian world, aided by his father’s millions. The major will
bring his son with him this evening, the _contino_, as we say in Italy;
he confides him to my care. If he proves himself worthy of it, I will
do what I can to advance his interests. You will assist me in the work,
will you not?”

“Most undoubtedly. This Major Cavalcanti is an old friend of yours,
then?”

“By no means. He is a perfect nobleman, very polite, modest, and
agreeable, such as may be found constantly in Italy, descendants of
very ancient families. I have met him several times at Florence,
Bologna and Lucca, and he has now communicated to me the fact of his
arrival in Paris. The acquaintances one makes in travelling have a sort
of claim on one; they everywhere expect to receive the same attention
which you once paid them by chance, as though the civilities of a
passing hour were likely to awaken any lasting interest in favor of the
man in whose society you may happen to be thrown in the course of your
journey. This good Major Cavalcanti is come to take a second view of
Paris, which he only saw in passing through in the time of the Empire,
when he was on his way to Moscow. I shall give him a good dinner, he
will confide his son to my care, I will promise to watch over him, I
shall let him follow in whatever path his folly may lead him, and then
I shall have done my part.”

“Certainly; I see you are a model Mentor,” said Albert “Good-bye, we
shall return on Sunday. By the way, I have received news of Franz.”

“Have you? Is he still amusing himself in Italy?”

“I believe so; however, he regrets your absence extremely. He says you
were the sun of Rome, and that without you all appears dark and cloudy;
I do not know if he does not even go so far as to say that it rains.”

“His opinion of me is altered for the better, then?”

“No, he still persists in looking upon you as the most incomprehensible
and mysterious of beings.”

“He is a charming young man,” said Monte Cristo “and I felt a lively
interest in him the very first evening of my introduction, when I met
him in search of a supper, and prevailed upon him to accept a portion
of mine. He is, I think, the son of General d’Épinay?”

“He is.”

“The same who was so shamefully assassinated in 1815?”

“By the Bonapartists.”

“Yes. Really I like him extremely; is there not also a matrimonial
engagement contemplated for him?”

“Yes, he is to marry Mademoiselle de Villefort.”

“Indeed?”

30115m



“And you know I am to marry Mademoiselle Danglars,” said Albert,
laughing.

“You smile.”

“Yes.”

“Why do you do so?”

“I smile because there appears to me to be about as much inclination
for the consummation of the engagement in question as there is for my
own. But really, my dear count, we are talking as much of women as they
do of us; it is unpardonable.”

Albert rose.

“Are you going?”

“Really, that is a good idea!—two hours have I been boring you to death
with my company, and then you, with the greatest politeness, ask me if
I am going. Indeed, count, you are the most polished man in the world.
And your servants, too, how very well behaved they are; there is quite
a style about them. Monsieur Baptistin especially; I could never get
such a man as that. My servants seem to imitate those you sometimes see
in a play, who, because they have only a word or two to say, aquit
themselves in the most awkward manner possible. Therefore, if you part
with M. Baptistin, give me the refusal of him.”

“By all means.”

“That is not all; give my compliments to your illustrious Luccanese,
Cavalcante of the Cavalcanti; and if by any chance he should be wishing
to establish his son, find him a wife very rich, very noble on her
mother’s side at least, and a baroness in right of her father, I will
help you in the search.”

“Ah, ha; yo