 Lucien Debray, bidding him call for them, it being
wholly impossible for her to go alone with Eugénie to the opera.

There is no gainsaying the fact that a very unfavorable construction
would have been put upon the circumstance if the two women had gone
without escort, while the addition of a third, in the person of her
mother’s admitted lover, enabled Mademoiselle Danglars to defy malice
and ill-nature. One must take the world as one finds it.

30083m



The curtain rose, as usual, to an almost empty house, it being one of
the absurdities of Parisian fashion never to appear at the opera until
after the beginning of the performance, so that the first act is
generally played without the slightest attention being paid to it, that
part of the audience already assembled being too much occupied in
observing the fresh arrivals, while nothing is heard but the noise of
opening and shutting doors, and the buzz of conversation.

“Surely,” said Albert, as the door of a box on the first circle opened,
“that must be the Countess G——.”

“And who is the Countess G——?” inquired Château-Renaud.

“What a question! Now, do you know, baron, I have a great mind to pick
a quarrel with you for asking it; as if all the world did not know who
the Countess G—— was.”

“Ah, to be sure,” replied Château-Renaud; “the lovely Venetian, is it
not?”

“Herself.” At this moment the countess perceived Albert, and returned
his salutation with a smile.

“You know her, it seems?” said Château-Renaud.

“Franz introduced me to her at Rome,” replied Albert.

“Well, then, will you do as much for me in Paris as Franz did for you
in Rome?”

“With pleasure.”

There was a cry of “Shut up!” from the audience. This manifestation on
the part of the spectators of their wish to be allowed to hear the
music, produced not the slightest effect on the two young men, who
continued their conversation.

“The countess was present at the races in the Champ-de-Mars,” said
Château-Renaud.

“Today?”

“Yes.”

“Bless me, I quite forgot the races. Did you bet?”

“Oh, merely a paltry fifty louis.”

“And who was the winner?”

“Nautilus. I staked on him.”

“But there were three races, were there not?”

“Yes; there was the prize given by the Jockey Club—a gold cup, you
know—and a very singular circumstance occurred about that race.”

“What was it?”

“Oh, shut up!” again interposed some of the audience.

“Why, it was won by a horse and rider utterly unknown on the course.”

“Is that possible?”

“True as day. The fact was, nobody had observed a horse entered by the
name of Vampa, or that of a jockey styled Job, when, at the last
moment, a splendid roan, mounted by a jockey about as big as your fist,
presented themselves at the starting-post. They were obliged to stuff
at least twenty pounds weight of shot in the small rider’s pockets, to
make him weight; but with all that he outstripped Ariel and Barbare,
against whom he ran, by at least three whole lengths.”

“And was it not found out at last to whom the horse and jockey
belonged?”

“No.”

“You say that the horse was entered under the name of Vampa?”

“Exactly; that was the title.”

“Then,” answered Albert, “I am better informed than you are, and know
who the owner of that horse was.”

“Shut up, there!” cried the pit in chorus. And this time the tone and
manner in which the command was given, betokened such growing hostility
that the two young men perceived, for the first time, that the mandate
was addressed to them. Leisurely turning round, they calmly scrutinized
the various countenances around them, as though demanding some one
person who would take upon himself the responsibility of what they
deemed excessive impertinence; but as no one responded to the
challenge, the friends turned again to the front of the theatre, and
affected to busy themselves with the stage. At this moment the door of
the minister’s box opened, and Madame Danglars, 