 have a tempest,
or I don’t know what’s what.’ You could see the wind coming like the
dust at Montredon; luckily the captain understood his business. ‘Take
in two reefs in the top-sails,’ cried the captain; ‘let go the
bowlin’s, haul the brace, lower the top-gallant sails, haul out the
reef-tackles on the yards.’”

20041m



“That was not enough for those latitudes,” said the Englishman; “I
should have taken four reefs in the topsails and furled the spanker.”

His firm, sonorous, and unexpected voice made everyone start. Penelon
put his hand over his eyes, and then stared at the man who thus
criticized the manœuvres of his captain.

“We did better than that, sir,” said the old sailor respectfully; “we
put the helm up to run before the tempest; ten minutes after we struck
our top-sails and scudded under bare poles.”

“The vessel was very old to risk that,” said the Englishman.

“Eh, it was that that did the business; after pitching heavily for
twelve hours we sprung a leak. ‘Penelon,’ said the captain, ‘I think we
are sinking, give me the helm, and go down into the hold.’ I gave him
the helm, and descended; there was already three feet of water. ‘All
hands to the pumps!’ I shouted; but it was too late, and it seemed the
more we pumped the more came in. ‘Ah,’ said I, after four hours’ work,
‘since we are sinking, let us sink; we can die but once.’ ‘Is that the
example you set, Penelon?’ cries the captain; ‘very well, wait a
minute.’ He went into his cabin and came back with a brace of pistols.
‘I will blow the brains out of the first man who leaves the pump,’ said
he.”

“Well done!” said the Englishman.

20043m



“There’s nothing gives you so much courage as good reasons,” continued
the sailor; “and during that time the wind had abated, and the sea gone
down, but the water kept rising; not much, only two inches an hour, but
still it rose. Two inches an hour does not seem much, but in twelve
hours that makes two feet, and three we had before, that makes five.
‘Come,’ said the captain, ‘we have done all in our power, and M. Morrel
will have nothing to reproach us with, we have tried to save the ship,
let us now save ourselves. To the boats, my lads, as quick as you can.’
Now,” continued Penelon, “you see, M. Morrel, a sailor is attached to
his ship, but still more to his life, so we did not wait to be told
twice; the more so, that the ship was sinking under us, and seemed to
say, ‘Get along—save yourselves.’ We soon launched the boat, and all
eight of us got into it. The captain descended last, or rather, he did
not descend, he would not quit the vessel; so I took him round the
waist, and threw him into the boat, and then I jumped after him. It was
time, for just as I jumped the deck burst with a noise like the
broadside of a man-of-war. Ten minutes after she pitched forward, then
the other way, spun round and round, and then good-bye to the
_Pharaon_. As for us, we were three days without anything to eat or
drink, so that we began to think of drawing lots who should feed the
rest, when we saw _La Gironde_; we made signals of distress, she
perceived us, made for us, and took us all on board. There now, M.
Morrel, that’s the whole truth, on the honor of a sailor; is not it
true, you fellows there?” A general murmur of approbation showed that
the narrator had faithfully detailed their misfortunes and sufferings.

“Well, well,” said M. Morrel, “I know there was no one in fault but
destiny. It was the will of God that this should happen, blessed be his
name. What wages are due to you?”

“Oh, don’t let us talk of that, M. Morrel.”

“Yes, but we will talk of it.”

“Well, then, three months,” said Penelon.

“Cocles, pay two hundred francs to each of these good fellows,” said
Morrel. “At another time,” added he, “I should have said, Give them,
besides, two hundred francs over as a present; but times are changed,
and the little money that remains to me is not