ridiculous in me to regulate my conduct
by such caprices. I shall still continue to preserve the same respect
toward M. Noirtier; I will suffer, without complaint, the pecuniary
deprivation to which he has subjected me; but I shall remain firm in my
determination, and the world shall see which party has reason on his
side. Consequently I shall marry my daughter to the Baron Franz
d’Épinay, because I consider it would be a proper and eligible match
for her to make, and, in short, because I choose to bestow my
daughter’s hand on whomever I please.”

“What?” said the count, the approbation of whose eye Villefort had
frequently solicited during this speech. “What? Do you say that M.
Noirtier disinherits Mademoiselle de Villefort because she is going to
marry M. le Baron Franz d’Épinay?”

“Yes, sir, that is the reason,” said Villefort, shrugging his
shoulders.

“The apparent reason, at least,” said Madame de Villefort.

“The _real_ reason, madame, I can assure you; I know my father.”

“But I want to know in what way M. d’Épinay can have displeased your
father more than any other person?”

“I believe I know M. Franz d’Épinay,” said the count; “is he not the
son of General de Quesnel, who was created Baron d’Épinay by Charles
X.?”

“The same,” said Villefort.

“Well, but he is a charming young man, according to my ideas.”

“He is, which makes me believe that it is only an excuse of M. Noirtier
to prevent his granddaughter marrying; old men are always so selfish in
their affection,” said Madame de Villefort.

“But,” said Monte Cristo “do you not know any cause for this hatred?”

“Ah, _ma foi!_ who is to know?”

“Perhaps it is some political difference?”

“My father and the Baron d’Épinay lived in the stormy times of which I
only saw the ending,” said Villefort.

“Was not your father a Bonapartist?” asked Monte Cristo; “I think I
remember that you told me something of that kind.”

“My father has been a Jacobin more than anything else,” said Villefort,
carried by his emotion beyond the bounds of prudence; “and the
senator’s robe, which Napoleon cast on his shoulders, only served to
disguise the old man without in any degree changing him. When my father
conspired, it was not for the emperor, it was against the Bourbons; for
M. Noirtier possessed this peculiarity, he never projected any Utopian
schemes which could never be realized, but strove for possibilities,
and he applied to the realization of these possibilities the terrible
theories of The Mountain,—theories that never shrank from any means
that were deemed necessary to bring about the desired result.”

“Well,” said Monte Cristo, “it is just as I thought; it was politics
which brought Noirtier and M. d’Épinay into personal contact. Although
General d’Épinay served under Napoleon, did he not still retain
royalist sentiments? And was he not the person who was assassinated one
evening on leaving a Bonapartist meeting to which he had been invited
on the supposition that he favored the cause of the emperor?”

Villefort looked at the count almost with terror.

“Am I mistaken, then?” said Monte Cristo.

“No, sir, the facts were precisely what you have stated,” said Madame
de Villefort; “and it was to prevent the renewal of old feuds that M.
de Villefort formed the idea of uniting in the bonds of affection the
two children of these inveterate enemies.”

“It was a sublime and charitable thought,” said Monte Cristo, “and the
whole world should applaud it. It would be noble to see Mademoiselle
Noirtier de Villefort assuming the title of Madame Franz d’Épinay.”

Villefort shuddered and looked at Monte Cristo as if he wished to read
in his countenance the real feelings which had dictated the words he
had just uttered. But the count completely baffled the procureur, and
prevented him from discovering anything beneath the never-varying smile
he was so constantly in the habit of assuming.

“Although,” said Villef