Lord Henry sitting alone, in the morning-room, looking very much bored.

“I am so sorry, Harry,” he cried, “but really it is entirely your
fault. That book you sent me so fascinated me that I forgot how the
time was going.”

“Yes, I thought you would like it,” replied his host, rising from his
chair.

“I didn’t say I liked it, Harry. I said it fascinated me. There is a
great difference.”

“Ah, you have discovered that?” murmured Lord Henry. And they passed
into the dining-room.




CHAPTER XI.


For years, Dorian Gray could not free himself from the influence of
this book. Or perhaps it would be more accurate to say that he never
sought to free himself from it. He procured from Paris no less than
nine large-paper copies of the first edition, and had them bound in
different colours, so that they might suit his various moods and the
changing fancies of a nature over which he seemed, at times, to have
almost entirely lost control. The hero, the wonderful young Parisian in
whom the romantic and the scientific temperaments were so strangely
blended, became to him a kind of prefiguring type of himself. And,
indeed, the whole book seemed to him to contain the story of his own
life, written before he had lived it.

In one point he was more fortunate than the novel’s fantastic hero. He
never knew—never, indeed, had any cause to know—that somewhat grotesque
dread of mirrors, and polished metal surfaces, and still water which
came upon the young Parisian so early in his life, and was occasioned
by the sudden decay of a beau that had once, apparently, been so
remarkable. It was with an almost cruel joy—and perhaps in nearly every
joy, as certainly in every pleasure, cruelty has its place—that he used
to read the latter part of the book, with its really tragic, if
somewhat overemphasized, account of the sorrow and despair of one who
had himself lost what in others, and the world, he had most dearly
valued.

For the wonderful beauty that had so fascinated Basil Hallward, and
many others besides him, seemed never to leave him. Even those who had
heard the most evil things against him—and from time to time strange
rumours about his mode of life crept through London and became the
chatter of the clubs—could not believe anything to his dishonour when
they saw him. He had always the look of one who had kept himself
unspotted from the world. Men who talked grossly became silent when
Dorian Gray entered the room. There was something in the purity of his
face that rebuked them. His mere presence seemed to recall to them the
memory of the innocence that they had tarnished. They wondered how one
so charming and graceful as he was could have escaped the stain of an
age that was at once sordid and sensual.

Often, on returning home from one of those mysterious and prolonged
absences that gave rise to such strange conjecture among those who were
his friends, or thought that they were so, he himself would creep
upstairs to the locked room, open the door with the key that never left
him now, and stand, with a mirror, in front of the portrait that Basil
Hallward had painted of him, looking now at the evil and aging face on
the canvas, and now at the fair young face that laughed back at him
from the polished glass. The very sharpness of the contrast used to
quicken his sense of pleasure. He grew more and more enamoured of his
own beauty, more and more interested in the corruption of his own soul.
He would examine with minute care, and sometimes with a monstrous and
terrible delight, the hideous lines that seared the wrinkling forehead
or crawled around the heavy sensual mouth, wondering sometimes which
were the more horrible, the signs of sin or the signs of age. He would
place his white hands beside the coarse bloated hands of the picture,
and smile. He mocked the misshapen body and the failing limbs.

There were moments, indeed, at night, when, lying sleepless in his own
delicatel