ken.”

“If it were otherwise—if he treated me diplomatically—that is to say,
like a man who wishes, by some means or other, to obtain a footing in
the house, so that he may ultimately gain the power of dictating to its
occupants—he would, if it had been but once, have honored me with the
smile which you extol so loudly; but no, he saw that I was unhappy, he
understood that I could be of no use to him, and therefore paid no
attention to me whatever. Who knows but that, in order to please Madame
de Villefort and my father, he may not persecute me by every means in
his power? It is not just that he should despise me so, without any
reason. Ah, forgive me,” said Valentine, perceiving the effect which
her words were producing on Maximilian: “I have done wrong, for I have
given utterance to thoughts concerning that man which I did not even
know existed in my heart. I do not deny the influence of which you
speak, or that I have not myself experienced it, but with me it has
been productive of evil rather than good.”

“Well, Valentine,” said Morrel with a sigh, “we will not discuss the
matter further. I will not make a confidant of him.”

“Alas!” said Valentine, “I see that I have given you pain. I can only
say how sincerely I ask pardon for having grieved you. But, indeed, I
am not prejudiced beyond the power of conviction. Tell me what this
Count of Monte Cristo has done for you.”

30157m



“I own that your question embarrasses me, Valentine, for I cannot say
that the count has rendered me any ostensible service. Still, as I have
already told you, I have an instinctive affection for him, the source
of which I cannot explain to you. Has the sun done anything for me? No;
he warms me with his rays, and it is by his light that I see
you—nothing more. Has such and such a perfume done anything for me? No;
its odor charms one of my senses—that is all I can say when I am asked
why I praise it. My friendship for him is as strange and unaccountable
as his for me. A secret voice seems to whisper to me that there must be
something more than chance in this unexpected reciprocity of
friendship. In his most simple actions, as well as in his most secret
thoughts, I find a relation to my own. You will perhaps smile at me
when I tell you that, ever since I have known this man, I have
involuntarily entertained the idea that all the good fortune which has
befallen me originated from him. However, I have managed to live thirty
years without this protection, you will say; but I will endeavor a
little to illustrate my meaning. He invited me to dine with him on
Saturday, which was a very natural thing for him to do. Well, what have
I learned since? That your mother and M. de Villefort are both coming
to this dinner. I shall meet them there, and who knows what future
advantages may result from the interview? This may appear to you to be
no unusual combination of circumstances; nevertheless, I perceive some
hidden plot in the arrangement—something, in fact, more than is
apparent on a casual view of the subject. I believe that this singular
man, who appears to fathom the motives of everyone, has purposely
arranged for me to meet M. and Madame de Villefort, and sometimes, I
confess, I have gone so far as to try to read in his eyes whether he
was in possession of the secret of our love.”

“My good friend,” said Valentine, “I should take you for a visionary,
and should tremble for your reason, if I were always to hear you talk
in a strain similar to this. Is it possible that you can see anything
more than the merest chance in this meeting? Pray reflect a little. My
father, who never goes out, has several times been on the point of
refusing this invitation; Madame de Villefort, on the contrary, is
burning with the desire of seeing this extraordinary nabob in his own
house, therefore, she has with great difficulty prevailed on my father
to accompany her. No, no; it is as I have said, Maximilian,—th