
fifty, and his black moustache and eyebrows contrasted strangely with
his almost white hair, which was cut short, in the military fashion. He
was dressed in plain clothes, and wore at his button-hole the ribbons
of the different orders to which he belonged.

He entered with a tolerably dignified step, and some little haste.
Monte Cristo saw him advance towards him without making a single step.
It seemed as if his feet were rooted to the ground, and his eyes on the
Count of Morcerf.

“Father,” said the young man, “I have the honor of presenting to you
the Count of Monte Cristo, the generous friend whom I had the good
fortune to meet in the critical situation of which I have told you.”

“You are most welcome, monsieur,” said the Count of Morcerf, saluting
Monte Cristo with a smile, “and monsieur has rendered our house, in
preserving its only heir, a service which insures him our eternal
gratitude.”

As he said these words, the count of Morcerf pointed to a chair, while
he seated himself in another opposite the window.

Monte Cristo, in taking the seat Morcerf offered him, placed himself in
such a manner as to remain concealed in the shadow of the large velvet
curtains, and read on the careworn and livid features of the count a
whole history of secret griefs written in each wrinkle time had planted
there.

“The countess,” said Morcerf, “was at her toilet when she was informed
of the visit she was about to receive. She will, however, be in the
salon in ten minutes.”

“It is a great honor to me,” returned Monte Cristo, “to be thus, on the
first day of my arrival in Paris, brought in contact with a man whose
merit equals his reputation, and to whom fortune has for once been
equitable, but has she not still on the plains of Mitidja, or in the
mountains of Atlas, a marshal’s staff to offer you?”

“Oh,” replied Morcerf, reddening slightly, “I have left the service,
monsieur. Made a peer at the Restoration, I served through the first
campaign under the orders of Marshal Bourmont. I could, therefore,
expect a higher rank, and who knows what might have happened had the
elder branch remained on the throne? But the Revolution of July was, it
seems, sufficiently glorious to allow itself to be ungrateful, and it
was so for all services that did not date from the imperial period. I
tendered my resignation, for when you have gained your epaulets on the
battle-field, you do not know how to manœuvre on the slippery grounds
of the salons. I have hung up my sword, and cast myself into politics.
I have devoted myself to industry; I study the useful arts. During the
twenty years I served, I often wished to do so, but I had not the
time.”

“These are the ideas that render your nation superior to any other,”
returned Monte Cristo. “A gentleman of high birth, possessor of an
ample fortune, you have consented to gain your promotion as an obscure
soldier, step by step—this is uncommon; then become general, peer of
France, commander of the Legion of Honor, you consent to again commence
a second apprenticeship, without any other hope or any other desire
than that of one day becoming useful to your fellow-creatures; this,
indeed, is praiseworthy,—nay, more, it is sublime.”

20265m



Albert looked on and listened with astonishment; he was not used to see
Monte Cristo give vent to such bursts of enthusiasm.

“Alas,” continued the stranger, doubtless to dispel the slight cloud
that covered Morcerf’s brow, “we do not act thus in Italy; we grow
according to our race and our species, and we pursue the same lines,
and often the same uselessness, all our lives.”

“But, monsieur,” said the Count of Morcerf, “for a man of your merit,
Italy is not a country, and France opens her arms to receive you;
respond to her call. France will not, perhaps, be always ungrateful.
She treats her children ill, but she always welcomes strangers.”

“Ah, father,” said Albert with a smile, “it is evident you 