ption
of the one celebrated in the _Thousand and One Nights_——”

“Well, it is one of his descendants, and a great friend of mine; he is
a very rich Englishman, eccentric almost to insanity, and his real name
is Lord Wilmore.”

“Ah, indeed? Then that explains everything that is extraordinary,” said
Andrea. “He is, then, the same Englishman whom I met—at—ah—yes, indeed.
Well, monsieur, I am at your service.”

“If what you say be true,” replied the count, smiling, “perhaps you
will be kind enough to give me some account of yourself and your
family?”

“Certainly, I will do so,” said the young man, with a quickness which
gave proof of his ready invention. “I am (as you have said) the Count
Andrea Cavalcanti, son of Major Bartolomeo Cavalcanti, a descendant of
the Cavalcanti whose names are inscribed in the golden book at
Florence. Our family, although still rich (for my father’s income
amounts to half a million), has experienced many misfortunes, and I
myself was, at the age of five years, taken away by the treachery of my
tutor, so that for fifteen years I have not seen the author of my
existence. Since I have arrived at years of discretion and become my
own master, I have been constantly seeking him, but all in vain. At
length I received this letter from your friend, which states that my
father is in Paris, and authorizes me to address myself to you for
information respecting him.”

“Really, all you have related to me is exceedingly interesting,” said
Monte Cristo, observing the young man with a gloomy satisfaction; “and
you have done well to conform in everything to the wishes of my friend
Sinbad; for your father is indeed here, and is seeking you.”

The count from the moment of first entering the drawing-room, had not
once lost sight of the expression of the young man’s countenance; he
had admired the assurance of his look and the firmness of his voice;
but at these words, so natural in themselves, “Your father is indeed
here, and is seeking you,” young Andrea started, and exclaimed, “My
father? Is my father here?”

“Most undoubtedly,” replied Monte Cristo; “your father, Major
Bartolomeo Cavalcanti.” The expression of terror which, for the moment,
had overspread the features of the young man, had now disappeared.

“Ah, yes, that is the name, certainly. Major Bartolomeo Cavalcanti. And
you really mean to say; monsieur, that my dear father is here?”

“Yes, sir; and I can even add that I have only just left his company.
The history which he related to me of his lost son touched me to the
quick; indeed, his griefs, hopes, and fears on that subject might
furnish material for a most touching and pathetic poem. At length, he
one day received a letter, stating that the abductors of his son now
offered to restore him, or at least to give notice where he might be
found, on condition of receiving a large sum of money, by way of
ransom. Your father did not hesitate an instant, and the sum was sent
to the frontier of Piedmont, with a passport signed for Italy. You were
in the south of France, I think?”

“Yes,” replied Andrea, with an embarrassed air, “I was in the south of
France.”

“A carriage was to await you at Nice?”

“Precisely so; and it conveyed me from Nice to Genoa, from Genoa to
Turin, from Turin to Chambéry, from Chambéry to Pont-de-Beauvoisin, and
from Pont-de-Beauvoisin to Paris.”

30133m



“Indeed? Then your father ought to have met with you on the road, for
it is exactly the same route which he himself took, and that is how we
have been able to trace your journey to this place.”

“But,” said Andrea, “if my father had met me, I doubt if he would have
recognized me; I must be somewhat altered since he last saw me.”

“Oh, the voice of nature,” said Monte Cristo.

“True,” interrupted the young man, “I had not looked upon it in that
light.”

“Now,” replied Monte Cristo “there is only one source of uneasiness
left in your father’s mind, which is t