d, and Albert
turned towards him.

“And you, too,” said he, “come, if you like, monsieur; you have a
claim, being almost one of the family, and I will give as many
rendezvous of that kind as I can find persons willing to accept them.”

Cavalcanti looked at Danglars with a stupefied air, and the latter,
making an effort, arose and stepped between the two young men. Albert’s
attack on Andrea had placed him on a different footing, and he hoped
this visit had another cause than that he had at first supposed.

“Indeed, sir,” said he to Albert, “if you are come to quarrel with this
gentleman because I have preferred him to you, I shall resign the case
to the king’s attorney.”

“You mistake, sir,” said Morcerf with a gloomy smile; “I am not
referring in the least to matrimony, and I only addressed myself to M.
Cavalcanti because he appeared disposed to interfere between us. In one
respect you are right, for I am ready to quarrel with everyone today;
but you have the first claim, M. Danglars.”

40212m



“Sir,” replied Danglars, pale with anger and fear, “I warn you, when I
have the misfortune to meet with a mad dog, I kill it; and far from
thinking myself guilty of a crime, I believe I do society a kindness.
Now, if you are mad and try to bite me, I will kill you without pity.
Is it my fault that your father has dishonored himself?”

“Yes, miserable wretch!” cried Morcerf, “it is your fault.”

Danglars retreated a few steps. “My fault?” said he; “you must be mad!
What do I know of the Grecian affair? Have I travelled in that country?
Did I advise your father to sell the castle of Yanina—to betray——”

“Silence!” said Albert, with a thundering voice. “No; it is not you who
have directly made this exposure and brought this sorrow on us, but you
hypocritically provoked it.”

“I?”

“Yes; you! How came it known?”

“I suppose you read it in the paper in the account from Yanina?”

“Who wrote to Yanina?”

“To Yanina?”

“Yes. Who wrote for particulars concerning my father?”

“I imagine anyone may write to Yanina.”

“But one person only wrote!”

“One only?”

“Yes; and that was you!”

“I, doubtless, wrote. It appears to me that when about to marry your
daughter to a young man, it is right to make some inquiries respecting
his family; it is not only a right, but a duty.”

“You wrote, sir, knowing what answer you would receive.”

“I, indeed? I assure you,” cried Danglars, with a confidence and
security proceeding less from fear than from the interest he really
felt for the young man, “I solemnly declare to you, that I should never
have thought of writing to Yanina, did I know anything of Ali Pasha’s
misfortunes.”

“Who, then, urged you to write? Tell me.”

“_Pardieu!_ it was the most simple thing in the world. I was speaking
of your father’s past history. I said the origin of his fortune
remained obscure. The person to whom I addressed my scruples asked me
where your father had acquired his property? I answered, ‘In
Greece.’—‘Then,’ said he, ‘write to Yanina.’”

“And who thus advised you?”

“No other than your friend, Monte Cristo.”

“The Count of Monte Cristo told you to write to Yanina?”

“Yes; and I wrote, and will show you my correspondence, if you like.”

Albert and Beauchamp looked at each other.

“Sir,” said Beauchamp, who had not yet spoken, “you appear to accuse
the count, who is absent from Paris at this moment, and cannot justify
himself.”

“I accuse no one, sir,” said Danglars; “I relate, and I will repeat
before the count what I have said to you.”

“Does the count know what answer you received?”

“Yes; I showed it to him.”

“Did he know my father’s Christian name was Fernand, and his family
name Mondego?”

“Yes, I had told him that long since, and I did only what any other
would have done in my circumstances, and perhaps less. When, the day
after the arrival of this answer, your father came by the advice of
Monte Cristo to ask 