 she shoots out all her heads at once, and carries off a man in
each mouth.

“‘You will find the other rock lie lower, but they are so close
together that there is not more than a bow-shot between them. [A large
fig tree in full leaf101 grows upon it], and under it lies the sucking
whirlpool of Charybdis. Three times in the day does she vomit forth her
waters, and three times she sucks them down again; see that you be not
there when she is sucking, for if you are, Neptune himself could not
save you; you must hug the Scylla side and drive ship by as fast as you
can, for you had better lose six men than your whole crew.’

“‘Is there no way,’ said I, ‘of escaping Charybdis, and at the same
time keeping Scylla off when she is trying to harm my men?’

“‘You dare devil,’ replied the goddess, ‘you are always wanting to
fight somebody or something; you will not let yourself be beaten even
by the immortals. For Scylla is not mortal; moreover she is savage,
extreme, rude, cruel and invincible. There is no help for it; your best
chance will be to get by her as fast as ever you can, for if you dawdle
about her rock while you are putting on your armour, she may catch you
with a second cast of her six heads, and snap up another half dozen of
your men; so drive your ship past her at full speed, and roar out
lustily to Crataiis who is Scylla’s dam, bad luck to her; she will then
stop her from making a second raid upon you.’

“‘You will now come to the Thrinacian island, and here you will see
many herds of cattle and flocks of sheep belonging to the sun-god—seven
herds of cattle and seven flocks of sheep, with fifty head in each
flock. They do not breed, nor do they become fewer in number, and they
are tended by the goddesses Phaethusa and Lampetie, who are children of
the sun-god Hyperion by Neaera. Their mother when she had borne them
and had done suckling them sent them to the Thrinacian island, which
was a long way off, to live there and look after their father’s flocks
and herds. If you leave these flocks unharmed, and think of nothing but
getting home, you may yet after much hardship reach Ithaca; but if you
harm them, then I forewarn you of the destruction both of your ship and
of your comrades; and even though you may yourself escape, you will
return late, in bad plight, after losing all your men.’

“Here she ended, and dawn enthroned in gold began to show in heaven,
whereon she returned inland. I then went on board and told my men to
loose the ship from her moorings; so they at once got into her, took
their places, and began to smite the grey sea with their oars.
Presently the great and cunning goddess Circe befriended us with a fair
wind that blew dead aft, and staid steadily with us, keeping our sails
well filled, so we did whatever wanted doing to the ship’s gear, and
let her go as wind and helmsman headed her.

“Then, being much troubled in mind, I said to my men, ‘My friends, it
is not right that one or two of us alone should know the prophecies
that Circe has made me, I will therefore tell you about them, so that
whether we live or die we may do so with our eyes open. First she said
we were to keep clear of the Sirens, who sit and sing most beautifully
in a field of flowers; but she said I might hear them myself so long as
no one else did. Therefore, take me and bind me to the crosspiece half
way up the mast; bind me as I stand upright, with a bond so fast that I
cannot possibly break away, and lash the rope’s ends to the mast
itself. If I beg and pray you to set me free, then bind me more tightly
still.’

“I had hardly finished telling everything to the men before we reached
the island of the two Sirens,102 for the wind had been very favourable.
Then all of a sudden it fell dead calm; there was not a breath of wind
nor a ripple upon the water, so the men furled the sails and stowed
them; then taking to their oars they whitened the water with the foam
they raised 