the
other he wiped the perspiration from his temples. From time to time
chills ran through his whole body, and clutched his heart in a grasp of
ice. Then he thought he was going to die. Yet the hours passed on
without any unusual disturbance, and Dantès knew that he had escaped
the first peril. It was a good augury.

At length, about the hour the governor had appointed, footsteps were
heard on the stairs. Edmond felt that the moment had arrived, summoned
up all his courage, held his breath, and would have been happy if at
the same time he could have repressed the throbbing of his veins. The
footsteps—they were double—paused at the door—and Dantès guessed that
the two grave-diggers had come to seek him—this idea was soon converted
into certainty, when he heard the noise they made in putting down the
hand-bier.

The door opened, and a dim light reached Dantès’ eyes through the
coarse sack that covered him; he saw two shadows approach his bed, a
third remaining at the door with a torch in its hand. The two men,
approaching the ends of the bed, took the sack by its extremities.

“He’s heavy, though, for an old and thin man,” said one, as he raised
the head.

“They say every year adds half a pound to the weight of the bones,”
said another, lifting the feet.

“Have you tied the knot?” inquired the first speaker.

“What would be the use of carrying so much more weight?” was the reply,
“I can do that when we get there.”

“Yes, you’re right,” replied the companion.

“What’s the knot for?” thought Dantès.

They deposited the supposed corpse on the bier. Edmond stiffened
himself in order to play the part of a dead man, and then the party,
lighted by the man with the torch, who went first, ascended the stairs.
Suddenly he felt the fresh and sharp night air, and Dantès knew that
the mistral was blowing. It was a sensation in which pleasure and pain
were strangely mingled.

The bearers went on for twenty paces, then stopped, putting the bier
down on the ground. One of them went away, and Dantès heard his shoes
striking on the pavement.

“Where am I?” he asked himself.

“Really, he is by no means a light load!” said the other bearer,
sitting on the edge of the hand-barrow.

Dantès’ first impulse was to escape, but fortunately he did not attempt
it.

“Give us a light,” said the other bearer, “or I shall never find what I
am looking for.”

The man with the torch complied, although not asked in the most polite
terms.

“What can he be looking for?” thought Edmond. “The spade, perhaps.”

An exclamation of satisfaction indicated that the grave-digger had
found the object of his search. “Here it is at last,” he said, “not
without some trouble, though.”

“Yes,” was the answer, “but it has lost nothing by waiting.”

As he said this, the man came towards Edmond, who heard a heavy
metallic substance laid down beside him, and at the same moment a cord
was fastened round his feet with sudden and painful violence.

“Well, have you tied the knot?” inquired the grave-digger, who was
looking on.

“Yes, and pretty tight too, I can tell you,” was the answer.

“Move on, then.” And the bier was lifted once more, and they proceeded.

They advanced fifty paces farther, and then stopped to open a door,
then went forward again. The noise of the waves dashing against the
rocks on which the château is built, reached Dantès’ ear distinctly as
they went forward.

“Bad weather!” observed one of the bearers; “not a pleasant night for a
dip in the sea.”

“Why, yes, the abbé runs a chance of being wet,” said the other; and
then there was a burst of brutal laughter.

Dantès did not comprehend the jest, but his hair stood erect on his
head.

“Well, here we are at last,” said one of them.

“A little farther—a little farther,” said the other. “You know very
well that the last was stopped on his way, dashed on the rocks, and the
governor told us next day that we were careless fellow