“This is Tuesday—well, tomorrow evening we leave, and the day after we
shall be at Tréport. Really, count, you have a delightful way of
setting people at their ease.”

“Indeed, you give me more credit than I deserve; I only wish to do what
will be agreeable to you, that is all.”

“When shall you send your invitations?”

“This very day.”

“Well, I will immediately call on M. Danglars, and tell him that my
mother and myself must leave Paris tomorrow. I have not seen you,
consequently I know nothing of your dinner.”

“How foolish you are! Have you forgotten that M. Debray has just seen
you at my house?”

“Ah, true.”

“Fix it this way. I have seen you, and invited you without any
ceremony, when you instantly answered that it would be impossible for
you to accept, as you were going to Tréport.”

“Well, then, that is settled; but you will come and call on my mother
before tomorrow?”

“Before tomorrow?—that will be a difficult matter to arrange, besides,
I shall just be in the way of all the preparations for departure.”

“Well, you can do better. You were only a charming man before, but, if
you accede to my proposal, you will be adorable.”

“What must I do to attain such sublimity?”

“You are today free as air—come and dine with me; we shall be a small
party—only yourself, my mother, and I. You have scarcely seen my
mother; you shall have an opportunity of observing her more closely.
She is a remarkable woman, and I only regret that there does not exist
another like her, about twenty years younger; in that case, I assure
you, there would very soon be a Countess and Viscountess of Morcerf. As
to my father, you will not see him; he is officially engaged, and dines
with the chief referendary. We will talk over our travels; and you, who
have seen the whole world, will relate your adventures—you shall tell
us the history of the beautiful Greek who was with you the other night
at the Opera, and whom you call your slave, and yet treat like a
princess. We will talk Italian and Spanish. Come, accept my invitation,
and my mother will thank you.”

“A thousand thanks,” said the count, “your invitation is most gracious,
and I regret exceedingly that it is not in my power to accept it. I am
not so much at liberty as you suppose; on the contrary, I have a most
important engagement.”

“Ah, take care, you were teaching me just now how, in case of an
invitation to dinner, one might creditably make an excuse. I require
the proof of a pre-engagement. I am not a banker, like M. Danglars, but
I am quite as incredulous as he is.”

“I am going to give you a proof,” replied the count, and he rang the
bell.

“Humph,” said Morcerf, “this is the second time you have refused to
dine with my mother; it is evident that you wish to avoid her.”

Monte Cristo started. “Oh, you do not mean that,” said he; “besides,
here comes the confirmation of my assertion.”

Baptistin entered, and remained standing at the door.

“I had no previous knowledge of your visit, had I?”

“Indeed, you are such an extraordinary person, that I would not answer
for it.”

“At all events, I could not guess that you would invite me to dinner.”

“Probably not.”

“Well, listen, Baptistin, what did I tell you this morning when I
called you into my laboratory?”

“To close the door against visitors as soon as the clock struck five,”
replied the valet.

“What then?”

“Ah, my dear count,” said Albert.

“No, no, I wish to do away with that mysterious reputation that you
have given me, my dear viscount; it is tiresome to be always acting
Manfred. I wish my life to be free and open. Go on, Baptistin.”

“Then to admit no one except Major Bartolomeo Cavalcanti and his son.”

“You hear—Major Bartolomeo Cavalcanti—a man who ranks amongst the most
ancient nobility of Italy, whose name Dante has celebrated in the tenth
canto of _The Inferno_, you remember it, do you not? Then there is his
son, Andrea, a charming yo