n other countries. Albert was triumphant in his
harlequin costume. A knot of rose-colored ribbons fell from his
shoulder almost to the ground. In order that there might be no
confusion, Franz wore his peasant’s costume.

As the day advanced, the tumult became greater. There was not on the
pavement, in the carriages, at the windows, a single tongue that was
silent, a single arm that did not move. It was a human storm, made up
of a thunder of cries, and a hail of sweetmeats, flowers, eggs,
oranges, and nosegays.

At three o’clock the sound of fireworks, let off on the Piazza del
Popolo and the Piazza di Venezia (heard with difficulty amid the din
and confusion) announced that the races were about to begin.

The races, like the _moccoli_, are one of the episodes peculiar to the
last days of the Carnival. At the sound of the fireworks the carriages
instantly broke ranks, and retired by the adjacent streets. All these
evolutions are executed with an inconceivable address and marvellous
rapidity, without the police interfering in the matter. The pedestrians
ranged themselves against the walls; then the trampling of horses and
the clashing of steel were heard. A detachment of carbineers, fifteen
abreast, galloped up the Corso in order to clear it for the _barberi_.
When the detachment arrived at the Piazza di Venezia, a second volley
of fireworks was discharged, to announce that the street was clear.

Almost instantly, in the midst of a tremendous and general outcry,
seven or eight horses, excited by the shouts of three hundred thousand
spectators, passed by like lightning. Then the Castle of Saint Angelo
fired three cannon to indicate that number three had won.

Immediately, without any other signal, the carriages moved on, flowing
on towards the Corso, down all the streets, like torrents pent up for a
while, which again flow into the parent river; and the immense stream
again continued its course between its two granite banks.

A new source of noise and movement was added to the crowd. The sellers
of _moccoletti_ entered on the scene. The _moccoli_, or _moccoletti_,
are candles which vary in size from the pascal taper to the rushlight,
and which give to each actor in the great final scene of the Carnival
two very serious problems to grapple with,—first, how to keep his own
_moccoletto_ alight; and secondly, how to extinguish the _moccoletti_
of others. The _moccoletto_ is like life: man has found but one means
of transmitting it, and that one comes from God. But he has discovered
a thousand means of taking it away, and the devil has somewhat aided
him. The _moccoletto_ is kindled by approaching it to a light. But who
can describe the thousand means of extinguishing the _moccoletto_?—the
gigantic bellows, the monstrous extinguishers, the superhuman fans.
Everyone hastened to purchase _moccoletti_—Franz and Albert among the
rest.

The night was rapidly approaching; and already, at the cry of
“_Moccoletti_!” repeated by the shrill voices of a thousand vendors,
two or three stars began to burn among the crowd. It was a signal. At
the end of ten minutes fifty thousand lights glittered, descending from
the Palazzo di Venezia to the Piazza del Popolo, and mounting from the
Piazza del Popolo to the Palazzo di Venezia. It seemed like the _fête_
of Jack-o’-lanterns.

It is impossible to form any idea of it without having seen it. Suppose
that all the stars had descended from the sky and mingled in a wild
dance on the face of the earth; the whole accompanied by cries that
were never heard in any other part of the world. The _facchino_ follows
the prince, the Transteverin the citizen, everyone blowing,
extinguishing, relighting. Had old Æolus appeared at this moment, he
would have been proclaimed king of the _moccoli_, and Aquilo the
heir-presumptive to the throne.

This battle of folly and flame continued for two hours; the Corso was
light as day; the features of the spectat