lbert, as he made his parting bow.

Just as he was passing the count’s box, the door opened, and Monte
Cristo came forth. After giving some directions to Ali, who stood in
the lobby, the count took Albert’s arm. Carefully closing the box door,
Ali placed himself before it, while a crowd of spectators assembled
round the Nubian.

“Upon my word,” said Monte Cristo, “Paris is a strange city, and the
Parisians a very singular people. See that cluster of persons collected
around poor Ali, who is as much astonished as themselves; really one
might suppose he was the only Nubian they had ever beheld. Now I can
promise you, that a Frenchman might show himself in public, either in
Tunis, Constantinople, Bagdad, or Cairo, without being treated in that
way.”

“That shows that the Eastern nations have too much good sense to waste
their time and attention on objects undeserving of either. However, as
far as Ali is concerned, I can assure you, the interest he excites is
merely from the circumstance of his being your attendant—you, who are
at this moment the most celebrated and fashionable person in Paris.”

“Really? and what has procured me so flattering a distinction?”

“What? why, yourself, to be sure! You give away horses worth a thousand
louis; you save the lives of ladies of high rank and beauty; under the
name of Major Black you run thoroughbreds ridden by tiny urchins not
larger than marmots; then, when you have carried off the golden trophy
of victory, instead of setting any value on it, you give it to the
first handsome woman you think of!”

“And who has filled your head with all this nonsense?”

“Why, in the first place, I heard it from Madame Danglars, who, by the
by, is dying to see you in her box, or to have you seen there by
others; secondly, I learned it from Beauchamp’s journal; and thirdly,
from my own imagination. Why, if you sought concealment, did you call
your horse Vampa?”

“That was an oversight, certainly,” replied the count; “but tell me,
does the Count of Morcerf never visit the Opera? I have been looking
for him, but without success.”

“He will be here tonight.”

“In what part of the house?”

“In the baroness’s box, I believe.”

“That charming young woman with her is her daughter?”

“Yes.”

“I congratulate you.”

Morcerf smiled.

“We will discuss that subject at length some future time,” said he.
“But what do you think of the music?”

“What music?”

“Why, the music you have been listening to.”

“Oh, it is well enough as the production of a human composer, sung by
featherless bipeds, to quote the late Diogenes.”

“From which it would seem, my dear count, that you can at pleasure
enjoy the seraphic strains that proceed from the seven choirs of
paradise?”

30097m



“You are right, in some degree; when I wish to listen to sounds more
exquisitely attuned to melody than mortal ear ever yet listened to, I
go to sleep.”

“Then sleep here, my dear count. The conditions are favorable; what
else was opera invented for?”

“No, thank you. Your orchestra is too noisy. To sleep after the manner
I speak of, absolute calm and silence are necessary, and then a certain
preparation——”

“I know—the famous hashish!”

“Precisely. So, my dear viscount, whenever you wish to be regaled with
music come and sup with me.”

“I have already enjoyed that treat when breakfasting with you,” said
Morcerf.

“Do you mean at Rome?”

“I do.”

“Ah, then, I suppose you heard Haydée’s guzla; the poor exile
frequently beguiles a weary hour in playing over to me the airs of her
native land.”

Morcerf did not pursue the subject, and Monte Cristo himself fell into
a silent reverie.

The bell rang at this moment for the rising of the curtain.

“You will excuse my leaving you,” said the count, turning in the
direction of his box.

“What? Are you going?”

“Pray, say everything that is kind to Countess G—— on the part of her
friend the vampire.”

“An