as over he was to come across a large nugget of pure
gold, the largest nugget that had ever been discovered, and bring it
down to the coast in a waggon guarded by six mounted policemen. The
bushrangers were to attack them three times, and be defeated with
immense slaughter. Or, no. He was not to go to the gold-fields at all.
They were horrid places, where men got intoxicated, and shot each other
in bar-rooms, and used bad language. He was to be a nice sheep-farmer,
and one evening, as he was riding home, he was to see the beautiful
heiress being carried off by a robber on a black horse, and give chase,
and rescue her. Of course, she would fall in love with him, and he with
her, and they would get married, and come home, and live in an immense
house in London. Yes, there were delightful things in store for him.
But he must be very good, and not lose his temper, or spend his money
foolishly. She was only a year older than he was, but she knew so much
more of life. He must be sure, also, to write to her by every mail, and
to say his prayers each night before he went to sleep. God was very
good, and would watch over him. She would pray for him, too, and in a
few years he would come back quite rich and happy.

The lad listened sulkily to her and made no answer. He was heart-sick
at leaving home.

Yet it was not this alone that made him gloomy and morose.
Inexperienced though he was, he had still a strong sense of the danger
of Sibyl’s position. This young dandy who was making love to her could
mean her no good. He was a gentleman, and he hated him for that, hated
him through some curious race-instinct for which he could not account,
and which for that reason was all the more dominant within him. He was
conscious also of the shallowness and vanity of his mother’s nature,
and in that saw infinite peril for Sibyl and Sibyl’s happiness.
Children begin by loving their parents; as they grow older they judge
them; sometimes they forgive them.

His mother! He had something on his mind to ask of her, something that
he had brooded on for many months of silence. A chance phrase that he
had heard at the theatre, a whispered sneer that had reached his ears
one night as he waited at the stage-door, had set loose a train of
horrible thoughts. He remembered it as if it had been the lash of a
hunting-crop across his face. His brows knit together into a wedge-like
furrow, and with a twitch of pain he bit his underlip.

“You are not listening to a word I am saying, Jim,” cried Sibyl, “and I
am making the most delightful plans for your future. Do say something.”

“What do you want me to say?”

“Oh! that you will be a good boy and not forget us,” she answered,
smiling at him.

He shrugged his shoulders. “You are more likely to forget me than I am
to forget you, Sibyl.”

She flushed. “What do you mean, Jim?” she asked.

“You have a new friend, I hear. Who is he? Why have you not told me
about him? He means you no good.”

“Stop, Jim!” she exclaimed. “You must not say anything against him. I
love him.”

“Why, you don’t even know his name,” answered the lad. “Who is he? I
have a right to know.”

“He is called Prince Charming. Don’t you like the name? Oh! you silly
boy! you should never forget it. If you only saw him, you would think
him the most wonderful person in the world. Some day you will meet
him—when you come back from Australia. You will like him so much.
Everybody likes him, and I ... love him. I wish you could come to the
theatre to-night. He is going to be there, and I am to play Juliet. Oh!
how I shall play it! Fancy, Jim, to be in love and play Juliet! To have
him sitting there! To play for his delight! I am afraid I may frighten
the company, frighten or enthrall them. To be in love is to surpass
one’s self. Poor dreadful Mr. Isaacs will be shouting ‘genius’ to his
loafers at the bar. He has preached me as a dogma; to-night he will
announce me as a revelation. I feel it.