er world.”

The countess shuddered.

“Albert,” she said, in a voice which was altered by emotion, “I have
always put you on your guard against new acquaintances. Now you are a
man, and are able to give me advice; yet I repeat to you, Albert, be
prudent.”

“Why, my dear mother, it is necessary, in order to make your advice
turn to account, that I should know beforehand what I have to distrust.
The count never plays, he only drinks pure water tinged with a little
sherry, and is so rich that he cannot, without intending to laugh at
me, try to borrow money. What, then, have I to fear from him?”

“You are right,” said the countess, “and my fears are weakness,
especially when directed against a man who has saved your life. How did
your father receive him, Albert? It is necessary that we should be more
than complaisant to the count. M. de Morcerf is sometimes occupied, his
business makes him reflective, and he might, without intending it——”

“Nothing could be in better taste than my father’s demeanor, madame,”
said Albert; “nay, more, he seemed greatly flattered at two or three
compliments which the count very skilfully and agreeably paid him with
as much ease as if he had known him these thirty years. Each of these
little tickling arrows must have pleased my father,” added Albert with
a laugh. “And thus they parted the best possible friends, and M. de
Morcerf even wished to take him to the Chamber to hear the speakers.”

The countess made no reply. She fell into so deep a reverie that her
eyes gradually closed. The young man, standing up before her, gazed
upon her with that filial affection which is so tender and endearing
with children whose mothers are still young and handsome. Then, after
seeing her eyes closed, and hearing her breathe gently, he believed she
had dropped asleep, and left the apartment on tiptoe, closing the door
after him with the utmost precaution.

“This devil of a fellow,” he muttered, shaking his head; “I said at the
time he would create a sensation here, and I measure his effect by an
infallible thermometer. My mother has noticed him, and he must
therefore, perforce, be remarkable.”

He went down to the stables, not without some slight annoyance, when he
remembered that the Count of Monte Cristo had laid his hands on a
“turnout” which sent his bays down to second place in the opinion of
connoisseurs.

“Most decidedly,” said he, “men are not equal, and I must beg my father
to develop this theorem in the Chamber of Peers.”



 Chapter 42. Monsieur Bertuccio

Meanwhile the count had arrived at his house; it had taken him six
minutes to perform the distance, but these six minutes were sufficient
to induce twenty young men who knew the price of the equipage they had
been unable to purchase themselves, to put their horses in a gallop in
order to see the rich foreigner who could afford to give 20,000 francs
apiece for his horses.

The house Ali had chosen, and which was to serve as a town residence to
Monte Cristo, was situated on the right hand as you ascend the
Champs-Élysées. A thick clump of trees and shrubs rose in the centre,
and masked a portion of the front; around this shrubbery two alleys,
like two arms, extended right and left, and formed a carriage-drive
from the iron gates to a double portico, on every step of which stood a
porcelain vase, filled with flowers. This house, isolated from the
rest, had, besides the main entrance, another in the Rue de Ponthieu.
Even before the coachman had hailed the _concierge_, the massy gates
rolled on their hinges—they had seen the Count coming, and at Paris, as
everywhere else, he was served with the rapidity of lightning. The
coachman entered and traversed the half-circle without slackening his
speed, and the gates were closed ere the wheels had ceased to sound on
the gravel. The carriage stopped at the left side of the portico, two
men presented themselves at the carriage-window; the one was