ch no one sees. Ah, if you
had tasted my life, you would not desire any other, and would never
return to the world unless you had some great project to accomplish
there.”

“Revenge, for instance!” observed Franz.

The unknown fixed on the young man one of those looks which penetrate
into the depth of the heart and thoughts. “And why revenge?” he asked.

“Because,” replied Franz, “you seem to me like a man who, persecuted by
society, has a fearful account to settle with it.”

“Ah!” responded Sinbad, laughing with his singular laugh, which
displayed his white and sharp teeth. “You have not guessed rightly.
Such as you see me I am, a sort of philosopher, and one day perhaps I
shall go to Paris to rival Monsieur Appert, and the man in the little
blue cloak.”

“And will that be the first time you ever took that journey?”

“Yes; it will. I must seem to you by no means curious, but I assure you
that it is not my fault I have delayed it so long—it will happen one
day or the other.”

20083m



“And do you propose to make this journey very shortly?”

“I do not know; it depends on circumstances which depend on certain
arrangements.”

“I should like to be there at the time you come, and I will endeavor to
repay you, as far as lies in my power, for your liberal hospitality
displayed to me at Monte Cristo.”

“I should avail myself of your offer with pleasure,” replied the host,
“but, unfortunately, if I go there, it will be, in all probability,
_incognito_.”

The supper appeared to have been supplied solely for Franz, for the
unknown scarcely touched one or two dishes of the splendid banquet to
which his guest did ample justice. Then Ali brought on the dessert, or
rather took the baskets from the hands of the statues and placed them
on the table. Between the two baskets he placed a small silver cup with
a silver cover. The care with which Ali placed this cup on the table
roused Franz’s curiosity. He raised the cover and saw a kind of
greenish paste, something like preserved angelica, but which was
perfectly unknown to him. He replaced the lid, as ignorant of what the
cup contained as he was before he had looked at it, and then casting
his eyes towards his host he saw him smile at his disappointment.

“You cannot guess,” said he, “what there is in that small vase, can
you?”

“No, I really cannot.”

“Well, then, that green preserve is nothing less than the ambrosia
which Hebe served at the table of Jupiter.”

“But,” replied Franz, “this ambrosia, no doubt, in passing through
mortal hands has lost its heavenly appellation and assumed a human
name; in vulgar phrase, what may you term this composition, for which,
to tell the truth, I do not feel any particular desire?”

“Ah, thus it is that our material origin is revealed,” cried Sinbad;
“we frequently pass so near to happiness without seeing, without
regarding it, or if we do see and regard it, yet without recognizing
it. Are you a man for the substantials, and is gold your god? taste
this, and the mines of Peru, Guzerat, and Golconda are opened to you.
Are you a man of imagination—a poet? taste this, and the boundaries of
possibility disappear; the fields of infinite space open to you, you
advance free in heart, free in mind, into the boundless realms of
unfettered reverie. Are you ambitious, and do you seek after the
greatnesses of the earth? taste this, and in an hour you will be a
king, not a king of a petty kingdom hidden in some corner of Europe
like France, Spain, or England, but king of the world, king of the
universe, king of creation; without bowing at the feet of Satan, you
will be king and master of all the kingdoms of the earth. Is it not
tempting what I offer you, and is it not an easy thing, since it is
only to do thus? look!”

At these words he uncovered the small cup which contained the substance
so lauded, took a teaspoonful of the magic sweetmeat, raised it to his
lips, and swallowed it slow