know why—but it has appeared as if Madame de
Villefort secretly objected to the marriage, although she did not
choose openly to oppose it.”

“Is it so? Then I feel as if I could adore Madame de Villefort.”

“Do not be in such a hurry to do that,” said Valentine, with a sad
smile.

“If she objects to your marrying M. d’Épinay, she would be all the more
likely to listen to any other proposition.”

“No, Maximilian, it is not suitors to which Madame de Villefort
objects, it is marriage itself.”

“Marriage? If she dislikes that so much, why did she ever marry
herself?”

“You do not understand me, Maximilian. About a year ago, I talked of
retiring to a convent. Madame de Villefort, in spite of all the remarks
which she considered it her duty to make, secretly approved of the
proposition, my father consented to it at her instigation, and it was
only on account of my poor grandfather that I finally abandoned the
project. You can form no idea of the expression of that old man’s eye
when he looks at me, the only person in the world whom he loves, and, I
had almost said, by whom he is beloved in return. When he learned my
resolution, I shall never forget the reproachful look which he cast on
me, and the tears of utter despair which chased each other down his
lifeless cheeks. Ah, Maximilian, I experienced, at that moment, such
remorse for my intention, that, throwing myself at his feet, I
exclaimed,—‘Forgive me, pray forgive me, my dear grandfather; they may
do what they will with me, I will never leave you.’ When I had ceased
speaking, he thankfully raised his eyes to heaven, but without uttering
a word. Ah, Maximilian, I may have much to suffer, but I feel as if my
grandfather’s look at that moment would more than compensate for all.”

“Dear Valentine, you are a perfect angel, and I am sure I do not know
what I—sabring right and left among the Bedouins—can have done to merit
your being revealed to me, unless, indeed, Heaven took into
consideration the fact that the victims of my sword were infidels. But
tell me what interest Madame de Villefort can have in your remaining
unmarried?”

“Did I not tell you just now that I was rich, Maximilian—too rich? I
possess nearly 50,000 livres in right of my mother; my grandfather and
my grandmother, the Marquis and Marquise de Saint-Méran, will leave me
as much, and M. Noirtier evidently intends making me his heir. My
brother Edward, who inherits nothing from his mother, will, therefore,
be poor in comparison with me. Now, if I had taken the veil, all this
fortune would have descended to my father, and, in reversion, to his
son.”

“Ah, how strange it seems that such a young and beautiful woman should
be so avaricious.”

“It is not for herself that she is so, but for her son, and what you
regard as a vice becomes almost a virtue when looked at in the light of
maternal love.”

“But could you not compromise matters, and give up a portion of your
fortune to her son?”

“How could I make such a proposition, especially to a woman who always
professes to be so entirely disinterested?”

“Valentine, I have always regarded our love in the light of something
sacred; consequently, I have covered it with the veil of respect, and
hid it in the innermost recesses of my soul. No human being, not even
my sister, is aware of its existence. Valentine, will you permit me to
make a confidant of a friend and reveal to him the love I bear you?”

Valentine started. “A friend, Maximilian; and who is this friend? I
tremble to give my permission.”

“Listen, Valentine. Have you never experienced for anyone that sudden
and irresistible sympathy which made you feel as if the object of it
had been your old and familiar friend, though, in reality, it was the
first time you had ever met? Nay, further, have you never endeavored to
recall the time, place, and circumstances of your former intercourse,
and failing in this attempt, have almost believed that yo