 times will cause death—so pay attention
to it, my dear Monsieur Danglars. Do you want money? Do you wish me to
lend you some?”

30253m



“What a bad calculator you are!” exclaimed Danglars, calling to his
assistance all his philosophy and dissimulation. “I have made money at
the same time by speculations which have succeeded. I have made up the
loss of blood by nutrition. I lost a battle in Spain, I have been
defeated in Trieste, but my naval army in India will have taken some
galleons, and my Mexican pioneers will have discovered some mine.”

“Very good, very good! But the wound remains and will reopen at the
first loss.”

“No, for I am only embarked in certainties,” replied Danglars, with the
air of a mountebank sounding his own praises; “to involve me, three
governments must crumble to dust.”

“Well, such things have been.”

“That there should be a famine!”

“Recollect the seven fat and the seven lean kine.”

“Or, that the sea should become dry, as in the days of Pharaoh, and
even then my vessels would become caravans.”

“So much the better. I congratulate you, my dear M. Danglars,” said
Monte Cristo; “I see I was deceived, and that you belong to the class
of second-rate fortunes.”

“I think I may aspire to that honor,” said Danglars with a smile, which
reminded Monte Cristo of the sickly moons which bad artists are so fond
of daubing into their pictures of ruins. “But, while we are speaking of
business,” Danglars added, pleased to find an opportunity of changing
the subject, “tell me what I am to do for M. Cavalcanti.”

“Give him money, if he is recommended to you, and the recommendation
seems good.”

“Excellent; he presented himself this morning with a bond of 40,000
francs, payable at sight, on you, signed by Busoni, and returned by you
to me, with your endorsement—of course, I immediately counted him over
the forty bank-notes.”

Monte Cristo nodded his head in token of assent.

“But that is not all,” continued Danglars; “he has opened an account
with my house for his son.”

“May I ask how much he allows the young man?”

“Five thousand francs per month.”

“Sixty thousand francs per year. I thought I was right in believing
that Cavalcanti to be a stingy fellow. How can a young man live upon
5,000 francs a month?”

“But you understand that if the young man should want a few thousands
more——”

“Do not advance it; the father will never repay it. You do not know
these ultramontane millionaires; they are regular misers. And by whom
were they recommended to you?”

“Oh, by the house of Fenzi, one of the best in Florence.”

“I do not mean to say you will lose, but, nevertheless, mind you hold
to the terms of the agreement.”

“Would you not trust the Cavalcanti?”

“I? oh, I would advance ten millions on his signature. I was only
speaking in reference to the second-rate fortunes we were mentioning
just now.”

“And with all this, how unassuming he is! I should never have taken him
for anything more than a mere major.”

“And you would have flattered him, for certainly, as you say, he has no
manner. The first time I saw him he appeared to me like an old
lieutenant who had grown mouldy under his epaulets. But all the
Italians are the same; they are like old Jews when they are not
glittering in Oriental splendor.”

“The young man is better,” said Danglars.

“Yes; a little nervous, perhaps, but, upon the whole, he appeared
tolerable. I was uneasy about him.”

“Why?”

“Because you met him at my house, just after his introduction into the
world, as they told me. He has been travelling with a very severe
tutor, and had never been to Paris before.”

“Ah, I believe noblemen marry amongst themselves, do they not?” asked
Danglars carelessly; “they like to unite their fortunes.”

“It is usual, certainly; but Cavalcanti is an original who does nothing
like other people. I cannot help thinking that he has brought his son
to France to choose a