t meeting with you,” observed
Valentine, raising her beautiful eyes to the count.

30065m



“But I remember it perfectly,” interposed the darling Edward.

“I will assist your memory, madame,” continued the count; “the day had
been burning hot; you were waiting for horses, which were delayed in
consequence of the festival. Mademoiselle was walking in the shade of
the garden, and your son disappeared in pursuit of the peacock.”

“And I caught it, mamma, don’t you remember?” interposed Edward, “and I
pulled three such beautiful feathers out of his tail.”

“You, madame, remained under the arbor; do you not remember, that while
you were seated on a stone bench, and while, as I told you,
Mademoiselle de Villefort and your young son were absent, you conversed
for a considerable time with somebody?”

“Yes, in truth, yes,” answered the young lady, turning very red, “I do
remember conversing with a person wrapped in a long woollen mantle; he
was a medical man, I think.”

“Precisely so, madame; this man was myself; for a fortnight I had been
at that hotel, during which period I had cured my valet de chambre of a
fever, and my landlord of the jaundice, so that I really acquired a
reputation as a skilful physician. We discoursed a long time, madame,
on different subjects; of Perugino, of Raphael, of manners, customs, of
the famous _aqua Tofana_, of which they had told you, I think you said,
that certain individuals in Perugia had preserved the secret.”

“Yes, true,” replied Madame de Villefort, somewhat uneasily, “I
remember now.”

“I do not recollect now all the various subjects of which we
discoursed, madame,” continued the count with perfect calmness; “but I
perfectly remember that, falling into the error which others had
entertained respecting me, you consulted me as to the health of
Mademoiselle de Villefort.”

“Yes, really, sir, you were in fact a medical man,” said Madame de
Villefort, “since you had cured the sick.”

“Molière or Beaumarchais would reply to you, madame, that it was
precisely because I was not, that I had cured my patients; for myself,
I am content to say to you that I have studied chemistry and the
natural sciences somewhat deeply, but still only as an amateur, you
understand.”

At this moment the clock struck six.

“It is six o’clock,” said Madame de Villefort, evidently agitated.
“Valentine, will you not go and see if your grandpapa will have his
dinner?”

Valentine rose, and saluting the count, left the apartment without
speaking.

“Oh, madame,” said the count, when Valentine had left the room, “was it
on my account that you sent Mademoiselle de Villefort away?”

“By no means,” replied the young lady quickly; “but this is the hour
when we usually give M. Noirtier the unwelcome meal that sustains his
pitiful existence. You are aware, sir, of the deplorable condition of
my husband’s father?”

“Yes, madame, M. de Villefort spoke of it to me—a paralysis, I think.”

“Alas, yes; the poor old gentleman is entirely helpless; the mind alone
is still active in this human machine, and that is faint and
flickering, like the light of a lamp about to expire. But excuse me,
sir, for talking of our domestic misfortunes; I interrupted you at the
moment when you were telling me that you were a skilful chemist.”

“No, madame, I did not say as much as that,” replied the count with a
smile; “quite the contrary. I have studied chemistry because, having
determined to live in eastern climates I have been desirous of
following the example of King Mithridates.”

“_Mithridates, rex Ponticus_,” said the young scamp, as he tore some
beautiful portraits out of a splendid album, “the individual who took
cream in his cup of poison every morning at breakfast.”

“Edward, you naughty boy,” exclaimed Madame de Villefort, snatching the
mutilated book from the urchin’s grasp, “you are positively past
bearing; you really disturb the conversation; go, leave us, and