.”

“By all means, be as wise as Nestor and as prudent as Ulysses; I do
more than permit, I exhort you.”

“Silence, then!” said Gaetano.

Everyone obeyed. For a man who, like Franz, viewed his position in its
true light, it was a grave one. He was alone in the darkness with
sailors whom he did not know, and who had no reason to be devoted to
him; who knew that he had several thousand francs in his belt, and who
had often examined his weapons,—which were very beautiful,—if not with
envy, at least with curiosity. On the other hand, he was about to land,
without any other escort than these men, on an island which had,
indeed, a very religious name, but which did not seem to Franz likely
to afford him much hospitality, thanks to the smugglers and bandits.
The history of the scuttled vessels, which had appeared improbable
during the day, seemed very probable at night; placed as he was between
two possible sources of danger, he kept his eye on the crew, and his
gun in his hand.

The sailors had again hoisted sail, and the vessel was once more
cleaving the waves. Through the darkness Franz, whose eyes were now
more accustomed to it, could see the looming shore along which the boat
was sailing, and then, as they rounded a rocky point, he saw the fire
more brilliant than ever, and about it five or six persons seated. The
blaze illumined the sea for a hundred paces around. Gaetano skirted the
light, carefully keeping the boat in the shadow; then, when they were
opposite the fire, he steered to the centre of the circle, singing a
fishing song, of which his companions sung the chorus.

At the first words of the song the men seated round the fire arose and
approached the landing-place, their eyes fixed on the boat, evidently
seeking to know who the new-comers were and what were their intentions.
They soon appeared satisfied and returned (with the exception of one,
who remained at the shore) to their fire, at which the carcass of a
goat was roasting. When the boat was within twenty paces of the shore,
the man on the beach, who carried a carbine, presented arms after the
manner of a sentinel, and cried, “Who comes there?” in Sardinian.

Franz coolly cocked both barrels. Gaetano then exchanged a few words
with this man which the traveller did not understand, but which
evidently concerned him.

“Will your excellency give your name, or remain _incognito_?” asked the
captain.

“My name must rest unknown,” replied Franz; “merely say I am a
Frenchman travelling for pleasure.”

As soon as Gaetano had transmitted this answer, the sentinel gave an
order to one of the men seated round the fire, who rose and disappeared
among the rocks. Not a word was spoken, everyone seemed occupied, Franz
with his disembarkment, the sailors with their sails, the smugglers
with their goat; but in the midst of all this carelessness it was
evident that they mutually observed each other.

The man who had disappeared returned suddenly on the opposite side to
that by which he had left; he made a sign with his head to the
sentinel, who, turning to the boat, said, “_S’accommodi_.” The Italian
_s’accommodi_ is untranslatable; it means at once, “Come, enter, you
are welcome; make yourself at home; you are the master.” It is like
that Turkish phrase of Molière’s that so astonished the bourgeois
gentleman by the number of things implied in its utterance.

The sailors did not wait for a second invitation; four strokes of the
oar brought them to land; Gaetano sprang to shore, exchanged a few
words with the sentinel, then his comrades disembarked, and lastly came
Franz. One of his guns was swung over his shoulder, Gaetano had the
other, and a sailor held his rifle; his dress, half artist, half dandy,
did not excite any suspicion, and, consequently, no disquietude. The
boat was moored to the shore, and they advanced a few paces to find a
comfortable bivouac; but, doubtless, the spot they chose did not suit
the 