his—he is anxious to know how you
have been employed during your long absence from him, how you have been
treated by your persecutors, and if they have conducted themselves
towards you with all the deference due to your rank. Finally, he is
anxious to see if you have been fortunate enough to escape the bad
moral influence to which you have been exposed, and which is infinitely
more to be dreaded than any physical suffering; he wishes to discover
if the fine abilities with which nature had endowed you have been
weakened by want of culture; and, in short, whether you consider
yourself capable of resuming and retaining in the world the high
position to which your rank entitles you.”

“Sir!” exclaimed the young man, quite astounded, “I hope no false
report——”

“As for myself, I first heard you spoken of by my friend Wilmore, the
philanthropist. I believe he found you in some unpleasant position, but
do not know of what nature, for I did not ask, not being inquisitive.
Your misfortunes engaged his sympathies, so you see you must have been
interesting. He told me that he was anxious to restore you to the
position which you had lost, and that he would seek your father until
he found him. He did seek, and has found him, apparently, since he is
here now; and, finally, my friend apprised me of your coming, and gave
me a few other instructions relative to your future fortune. I am quite
aware that my friend Wilmore is peculiar, but he is sincere, and as
rich as a gold mine, consequently, he may indulge his eccentricities
without any fear of their ruining him, and I have promised to adhere to
his instructions. Now, sir, pray do not be offended at the question I
am about to put to you, as it comes in the way of my duty as your
patron. I would wish to know if the misfortunes which have happened to
you—misfortunes entirely beyond your control, and which in no degree
diminish my regard for you—I would wish to know if they have not, in
some measure, contributed to render you a stranger to the world in
which your fortune and your name entitle you to make a conspicuous
figure?”

“Sir,” returned the young man, with a reassurance of manner, “make your
mind easy on this score. Those who took me from my father, and who
always intended, sooner or later, to sell me again to my original
proprietor, as they have now done, calculated that, in order to make
the most of their bargain, it would be politic to leave me in
possession of all my personal and hereditary worth, and even to
increase the value, if possible. I have, therefore, received a very
good education, and have been treated by these kidnappers very much as
the slaves were treated in Asia Minor, whose masters made them
grammarians, doctors, and philosophers, in order that they might fetch
a higher price in the Roman market.”

Monte Cristo smiled with satisfaction; it appeared as if he had not
expected so much from M. Andrea Cavalcanti.

“Besides,” continued the young man, “if there did appear some defect in
education, or offence against the established forms of etiquette, I
suppose it would be excused, in consideration of the misfortunes which
accompanied my birth, and followed me through my youth.”

“Well,” said Monte Cristo in an indifferent tone, “you will do as you
please, count, for you are the master of your own actions, and are the
person most concerned in the matter, but if I were you, I would not
divulge a word of these adventures. Your history is quite a romance,
and the world, which delights in romances in yellow covers, strangely
mistrusts those which are bound in living parchment, even though they
be gilded like yourself. This is the kind of difficulty which I wished
to represent to you, my dear count. You would hardly have recited your
touching history before it would go forth to the world, and be deemed
unlikely and unnatural. You would be no longer a lost child found, but
you would be looked upon as an upstart, who