Monte Cristo
we were talking about yesterday, but whom I little expected to see
today. I remember how unmercifully I laughed at what I considered your
eulogistic and exaggerated praises of him; but I have now ample cause
to admit that your enthusiastic description of this wonderful man fell
far short of his merits. Your horses got as far as Ranelagh, when they
darted forward like mad things, and galloped away at so fearful a rate,
that there seemed no other prospect for myself and my poor Edward but
that of being dashed to pieces against the first object that impeded
their progress, when a strange-looking man,—an Arab, a negro, or a
Nubian, at least a black of some nation or other—at a signal from the
count, whose domestic he is, suddenly seized and stopped the infuriated
animals, even at the risk of being trampled to death himself; and
certainly he must have had a most wonderful escape. The count then
hastened to us, and took us into his house, where he speedily recalled
my poor Edward to life. He sent us home in his own carriage. Yours will
be returned to you tomorrow. You will find your horses in bad
condition, from the results of this accident; they seem thoroughly
stupefied, as if sulky and vexed at having been conquered by man. The
count, however, has commissioned me to assure you that two or three
days’ rest, with plenty of barley for their sole food during that time,
will bring them back to as fine, that is as terrifying, a condition as
they were in yesterday.

20356m



Adieu! I cannot return you many thanks for the drive of yesterday; but,
after all, I ought not to blame you for the misconduct of your horses,
more especially as it procured me the pleasure of an introduction to
the Count of Monte Cristo,—and certainly that illustrious personage,
apart from the millions he is said to be so very anxious to dispose of,
seemed to me one of those curiously interesting problems I, for one,
delight in solving at any risk, even if it were to necessitate another
drive to the Bois behind your horses.

Edward endured the accident with miraculous courage—he did not utter a
single cry, but fell lifeless into my arms; nor did a tear fall from
his eyes after it was over. I doubt not you will consider these praises
the result of blind maternal affection, but there is a soul of iron in
that delicate, fragile body. Valentine sends many affectionate
remembrances to your dear Eugénie. I embrace you with all my heart.

Héloïse de Villefort.

P.S.—Do pray contrive some means for me to meet the Count of Monte
Cristo at your house. I must and will see him again. I have just made
M. de Villefort promise to call on him, and I hope the visit will be
returned.

That night the adventure at Auteuil was talked of everywhere. Albert
related it to his mother; Château-Renaud recounted it at the Jockey
Club, and Debray detailed it at length in the salons of the minister;
even Beauchamp accorded twenty lines in his journal to the relation of
the count’s courage and gallantry, thereby celebrating him as the
greatest hero of the day in the eyes of all the feminine members of the
aristocracy.

Vast was the crowd of visitors and inquiring friends who left their
names at the residence of Madame de Villefort, with the design of
renewing their visit at the right moment, of hearing from her lips all
the interesting circumstances of this most romantic adventure.

As for M. de Villefort, he fulfilled the predictions of Héloïse to the
letter,—donned his dress suit, drew on a pair of white gloves, ordered
the servants to attend the carriage dressed in their full livery, and
drove that same night to No. 30 in the Avenue des Champs-Élysées.



VOLUME THREE

30009m



30011m




 Chapter 48. Ideology

If the Count of Monte Cristo had been for a long time familiar with the
ways of Parisian society, he would have appreciated better the
significance of the step which M. de Villefort had