, M. Cavalcanti; it is a
most suitable alliance you are contracting, and Mademoiselle Danglars
is a handsome girl.”

“Yes, indeed she is,” replied Cavalcanti, in a very modest tone.

“Above all, she is very rich,—at least, I believe so,” said Monte
Cristo.

“Very rich, do you think?” replied the young man.

“Doubtless; it is said M. Danglars conceals at least half of his
fortune.”

“And he acknowledges fifteen or twenty millions,” said Andrea with a
look sparkling with joy.

“Without reckoning,” added Monte Cristo, “that he is on the eve of
entering into a sort of speculation already in vogue in the United
States and in England, but quite novel in France.”

“Yes, yes, I know what you mean,—the railway, of which he has obtained
the grant, is it not?”

“Precisely; it is generally believed he will gain ten millions by that
affair.”

“Ten millions! Do you think so? It is magnificent!” said Cavalcanti,
who was quite confounded at the metallic sound of these golden words.

“Without reckoning,” replied Monte Cristo, “that all his fortune will
come to you, and justly too, since Mademoiselle Danglars is an only
daughter. Besides, your own fortune, as your father assured me, is
almost equal to that of your betrothed. But enough of money matters. Do
you know, M. Andrea, I think you have managed this affair rather
skilfully?”

“Not badly, by any means,” said the young man; “I was born for a
diplomatist.”

“Well, you must become a diplomatist; diplomacy, you know, is something
that is not to be acquired; it is instinctive. Have you lost your
heart?”

“Indeed, I fear it,” replied Andrea, in the tone in which he had heard
Dorante or Valère reply to Alceste21 at the Théâtre Français.

“Is your love returned?”

“I suppose so,” said Andrea with a triumphant smile, “since I am
accepted. But I must not forget one grand point.”

“Which?”

“That I have been singularly assisted.”

“Nonsense.”

“I have, indeed.”

“By circumstances?”

“No; by you.”

“By me? Not at all, prince,” said Monte Cristo laying a marked stress
on the title, “what have I done for you? Are not your name, your social
position, and your merit sufficient?”

“No,” said Andrea,—“no; it is useless for you to say so, count. I
maintain that the position of a man like you has done more than my
name, my social position, and my merit.”

“You are completely mistaken, sir,” said Monte Cristo coldly, who felt
the perfidious manœuvre of the young man, and understood the bearing of
his words; “you only acquired my protection after the influence and
fortune of your father had been ascertained; for, after all, who
procured for me, who had never seen either you or your illustrious
father, the pleasure of your acquaintance?—two of my good friends, Lord
Wilmore and the Abbé Busoni. What encouraged me not to become your
surety, but to patronize you?—your father’s name, so well known in
Italy and so highly honored. Personally, I do not know you.”

This calm tone and perfect ease made Andrea feel that he was, for the
moment, restrained by a more muscular hand than his own, and that the
restraint could not be easily broken through.

“Oh, then my father has really a very large fortune, count?”

“It appears so, sir,” replied Monte Cristo.

“Do you know if the marriage settlement he promised me has come?”

“I have been advised of it.”

“But the three millions?”

“The three millions are probably on the road.”

“Then I shall really have them?”

“Oh, well,” said the count, “I do not think you have yet known the want
of money.”

Andrea was so surprised that he pondered the matter for a moment. Then,
arousing from his reverie:

“Now, sir, I have one request to make to you, which you will
understand, even if it should be disagreeable to you.”

“Proceed,” said Monte Cristo.

“I have formed an acquaintance, thanks to my good fortune, with many
noted persons, and have, at least for the moment, a crowd of 