a man who
had had his stall at the Bouffes, and had shared a lower box at the
Opera. Still, in spite of this, Albert displayed his most dazzling and
effective costumes each time he visited the theatres; but, alas, his
elegant toilet was wholly thrown away, and one of the most worthy
representatives of Parisian fashion had to carry with him the
mortifying reflection that he had nearly overrun Italy without meeting
with a single adventure.

Sometimes Albert would affect to make a joke of his want of success;
but internally he was deeply wounded, and his self-love immensely
piqued, to think that Albert de Morcerf, the most admired and most
sought after of any young person of his day, should thus be passed
over, and merely have his labor for his pains. And the thing was so
much the more annoying, as, according to the characteristic modesty of
a Frenchman, Albert had quitted Paris with the full conviction that he
had only to show himself in Italy to carry all before him, and that
upon his return he should astonish the Parisian world with the recital
of his numerous love-affairs.

Alas, poor Albert! None of those interesting adventures fell in his
way; the lovely Genoese, Florentines, and Neapolitans were all
faithful, if not to their husbands, at least to their lovers, and
thought not of changing even for the splendid appearance of Albert de
Morcerf; and all he gained was the painful conviction that the ladies
of Italy have this advantage over those of France, that they are
faithful even in their infidelity.

Yet he could not restrain a hope that in Italy, as elsewhere, there
might be an exception to the general rule.

Albert, besides being an elegant, well-looking young man, was also
possessed of considerable talent and ability; moreover, he was a
viscount—a recently created one, certainly, but in the present day it
is not necessary to go as far back as Noah in tracing a descent, and a
genealogical tree is equally estimated, whether dated from 1399 or
merely 1815; but to crown all these advantages, Albert de Morcerf
commanded an income of 50,000 livres, a more than sufficient sum to
render him a personage of considerable importance in Paris. It was
therefore no small mortification to him to have visited most of the
principal cities in Italy without having excited the most trifling
observation.

Albert, however, hoped to indemnify himself for all these slights and
indifferences during the Carnival, knowing full well that among the
different states and kingdoms in which this festivity is celebrated,
Rome is the spot where even the wisest and gravest throw off the usual
rigidity of their lives, and deign to mingle in the follies of this
time of liberty and relaxation. The Carnival was to commence on the
morrow; therefore Albert had not an instant to lose in setting forth
the programme of his hopes, expectations, and claims to notice.

With this design he had engaged a box in the most conspicuous part of
the theatre, and exerted himself to set off his personal attractions by
the aid of the most rich and elaborate toilet. The box taken by Albert
was in the first circle; although each of the three tiers of boxes is
deemed equally aristocratic, and is, for this reason, generally styled
the “nobility’s boxes,” and although the box engaged for the two
friends was sufficiently capacious to contain at least a dozen persons,
it had cost less than would be paid at some of the French theatres for
one admitting merely four occupants.

Another motive had influenced Albert’s selection of his seat,—who knew
but that, thus advantageously placed, he might not in truth attract the
notice of some fair Roman, and an introduction might ensue that would
procure him the offer of a seat in a carriage, or a place in a princely
balcony, from which he might behold the gayeties of the Carnival?

These united considerations made Albert more lively and anxious to
please than he had hitherto been