hose of
several persons, stopped at the door. A key was inserted in the lock of
the first door, and the creaking of hinges was audible.

“There are only two persons who have the key to that door,” murmured
Morrel, “Cocles and Julie.”

At this instant the second door opened, and the young girl, her eyes
bathed with tears, appeared. Morrel rose tremblingly, supporting
himself by the arm of the chair. He would have spoken, but his voice
failed him.

“Oh, father!” said she, clasping her hands, “forgive your child for
being the bearer of evil tidings.”

Morrel again changed color. Julie threw herself into his arms.

“Oh, father, father!” murmured she, “courage!”

“The _Pharaon_ has gone down, then?” said Morrel in a hoarse voice. The
young girl did not speak; but she made an affirmative sign with her
head as she lay on her father’s breast.

“And the crew?” asked Morrel.

“Saved,” said the girl; “saved by the crew of the vessel that has just
entered the harbor.”

Morrel raised his two hands to heaven with an expression of resignation
and sublime gratitude.

“Thanks, my God,” said he, “at least thou strikest but me alone.”

A tear moistened the eye of the phlegmatic Englishman.

“Come in, come in,” said Morrel, “for I presume you are all at the
door.”

Scarcely had he uttered those words when Madame Morrel entered weeping
bitterly. Emmanuel followed her, and in the antechamber were visible
the rough faces of seven or eight half-naked sailors. At the sight of
these men the Englishman started and advanced a step; then restrained
himself, and retired into the farthest and most obscure corner of the
apartment. Madame Morrel sat down by her husband and took one of his
hands in hers, Julie still lay with her head on his shoulder, Emmanuel
stood in the centre of the chamber and seemed to form the link between
Morrel’s family and the sailors at the door.

“How did this happen?” said Morrel.

“Draw nearer, Penelon,” said the young man, “and tell us all about it.”

An old seaman, bronzed by the tropical sun, advanced, twirling the
remains of a hat between his hands.

“Good-day, M. Morrel,” said he, as if he had just quitted Marseilles
the previous evening, and had just returned from Aix or Toulon.

“Good-day, Penelon,” returned Morrel, who could not refrain from
smiling through his tears, “where is the captain?”

“The captain, M. Morrel,—he has stayed behind sick at Palma; but please
God, it won’t be much, and you will see him in a few days all alive and
hearty.”

“Well, now tell your story, Penelon.”

20039m



Penelon rolled his quid in his cheek, placed his hand before his mouth,
turned his head, and sent a long jet of tobacco-juice into the
antechamber, advanced his foot, balanced himself, and began.

“You see, M. Morrel,” said he, “we were somewhere between Cape Blanc
and Cape Boyador, sailing with a fair breeze, south-south-west after a
week’s calm, when Captain Gaumard comes up to me—I was at the helm I
should tell you—and says, ‘Penelon, what do you think of those clouds
coming up over there?’ I was just then looking at them myself. ‘What do
I think, captain? Why I think that they are rising faster than they
have any business to do, and that they would not be so black if they
didn’t mean mischief.’—‘That’s my opinion too,’ said the captain, ‘and
I’ll take precautions accordingly. We are carrying too much canvas.
Avast, there, all hands! Take in the studding-sails and stow the flying
jib.’ It was time; the squall was on us, and the vessel began to heel.
‘Ah,’ said the captain, ‘we have still too much canvas set; all hands
lower the mainsail!’ Five minutes after, it was down; and we sailed
under mizzen-topsails and top-gallant sails. ‘Well, Penelon,’ said the
captain, ‘what makes you shake your head?’ ‘Why,’ I says, ‘I still
think you’ve got too much on.’ ‘I think you’re right,’ answered he, ‘we
shall have a gale.’ ‘A gale? More than that, we shall