
Dantès was tossed about on these doubts and wishes, when the patron,
who had great confidence in him, and was very desirous of retaining him
in his service, took him by the arm one evening and led him to a tavern
on the Via del’ Oglio, where the leading smugglers of Leghorn used to
congregate and discuss affairs connected with their trade. Already
Dantès had visited this maritime Bourse two or three times, and seeing
all these hardy free-traders, who supplied the whole coast for nearly
two hundred leagues in extent, he had asked himself what power might
not that man attain who should give the impulse of his will to all
these contrary and diverging minds. This time it was a great matter
that was under discussion, connected with a vessel laden with Turkey
carpets, stuffs of the Levant, and cashmeres. It was necessary to find
some neutral ground on which an exchange could be made, and then to try
and land these goods on the coast of France. If the venture was
successful the profit would be enormous, there would be a gain of fifty
or sixty piastres each for the crew.

The patron of _La Jeune Amélie_ proposed as a place of landing the
Island of Monte Cristo, which being completely deserted, and having
neither soldiers nor revenue officers, seemed to have been placed in
the midst of the ocean since the time of the heathen Olympus by
Mercury, the god of merchants and robbers, classes of mankind which we
in modern times have separated if not made distinct, but which
antiquity appears to have included in the same category.

At the mention of Monte Cristo Dantès started with joy; he rose to
conceal his emotion, and took a turn around the smoky tavern, where all
the languages of the known world were jumbled in a _lingua franca_.

When he again joined the two persons who had been discussing the
matter, it had been decided that they should touch at Monte Cristo and
set out on the following night. Edmond, being consulted, was of opinion
that the island afforded every possible security, and that great
enterprises to be well done should be done quickly.

Nothing then was altered in the plan, and orders were given to get
under weigh next night, and, wind and weather permitting, to make the
neutral island by the following day.

0289m




 Chapter 23. The Island of Monte Cristo

Thus, at length, by one of the unexpected strokes of fortune which
sometimes befall those who have for a long time been the victims of an
evil destiny, Dantès was about to secure the opportunity he wished for,
by simple and natural means, and land on the island without incurring
any suspicion. One night more and he would be on his way.

The night was one of feverish distraction, and in its progress visions,
good and evil, passed through Dantès’ mind. If he closed his eyes, he
saw Cardinal Spada’s letter written on the wall in characters of
flame—if he slept for a moment the wildest dreams haunted his brain. He
ascended into grottos paved with emeralds, with panels of rubies, and
the roof glowing with diamond stalactites. Pearls fell drop by drop, as
subterranean waters filter in their caves. Edmond, amazed,
wonderstruck, filled his pockets with the radiant gems and then
returned to daylight, when he discovered that his prizes had all
changed into common pebbles. He then endeavored to re-enter the
marvellous grottos, but they had suddenly receded, and now the path
became a labyrinth, and then the entrance vanished, and in vain did he
tax his memory for the magic and mysterious word which opened the
splendid caverns of Ali Baba to the Arabian fisherman. All was useless,
the treasure disappeared, and had again reverted to the genii from whom
for a moment he had hoped to carry it off.

The day came at length, and was almost as feverish as the night had
been, but it brought reason to the aid of imagination, and Dantès was
then enabled to arrange a plan which had hitherto been vague and
unsettled in his 