for not calling you by your
title when I first addressed you,” he said, “but you are aware that we
are living under a popular form of government, and that I am myself a
representative of the liberties of the people.”

“So much so,” replied Monte Cristo, “that while you call yourself baron
you are not willing to call anybody else count.”

“Upon my word, monsieur,” said Danglars with affected carelessness, “I
attach no sort of value to such empty distinctions; but the fact is, I
was made baron, and also chevalier of the Legion of Honor, in return
for services rendered, but——”

“But you have discarded your titles after the example set you by
Messrs. de Montmorency and Lafayette? That was a noble example to
follow, monsieur.”

“Why,” replied Danglars, “not entirely so; with the servants,—you
understand.”

“I see; to your domestics you are ‘my lord,’ the journalists style you
‘monsieur,’ while your constituents call you ‘citizen.’ These are
distinctions very suitable under a constitutional government. I
understand perfectly.”

Again Danglars bit his lips; he saw that he was no match for Monte
Cristo in an argument of this sort, and he therefore hastened to turn
to subjects more congenial.

“Permit me to inform you, Count,” said he, bowing, “that I have
received a letter of advice from Thomson & French, of Rome.”

“I am glad to hear it, baron,—for I must claim the privilege of
addressing you after the manner of your servants. I have acquired the
bad habit of calling persons by their titles from living in a country
where barons are still barons by right of birth. But as regards the
letter of advice, I am charmed to find that it has reached you; that
will spare me the troublesome and disagreeable task of coming to you
for money myself. You have received a regular letter of advice?”

“Yes,” said Danglars, “but I confess I didn’t quite comprehend its
meaning.”

“Indeed?”

“And for that reason I did myself the honor of calling upon you, in
order to beg for an explanation.”

“Go on, monsieur. Here I am, ready to give you any explanation you
desire.”

“Why,” said Danglars, “in the letter—I believe I have it about me”—here
he felt in his breast-pocket—“yes, here it is. Well, this letter gives
the Count of Monte Cristo unlimited credit on our house.”

“Well, baron, what is there difficult to understand about that?”

“Merely the term _unlimited_—nothing else, certainly.”

“Is not that word known in France? The people who wrote are
Anglo-Germans, you know.”

“Oh, as for the composition of the letter, there is nothing to be said;
but as regards the competency of the document, I certainly have
doubts.”

“Is it possible?” asked the count, assuming all air and tone of the
utmost simplicity and candor. “Is it possible that Thomson & French are
not looked upon as safe and solvent bankers? Pray tell me what you
think, baron, for I feel uneasy, I can assure you, having some
considerable property in their hands.”

“Thomson & French are perfectly solvent,” replied Danglars, with an
almost mocking smile; “but the word _unlimited_, in financial affairs,
is so extremely vague.”

“Is, in fact, unlimited,” said Monte Cristo.

“Precisely what I was about to say,” cried Danglars. “Now what is vague
is doubtful; and it was a wise man who said, ‘when in doubt, keep
out.’”

“Meaning to say,” rejoined Monte Cristo, “that however Thomson & French
may be inclined to commit acts of imprudence and folly, the Baron
Danglars is not disposed to follow their example.”

“Not at all.”

“Plainly enough; Messrs. Thomson & French set no bounds to their
engagements while those of M. Danglars have their limits; he is a wise
man, according to his own showing.”

“Monsieur,” replied the banker, drawing himself up with a haughty air,
“the extent of my resources has never yet been questioned.”

“It seems, then, reserved for me,” said Monte Cristo coldly, “to be the
first to do so.”

“By 