le moment for finding him in his best humor. At the first
sight of his old friend, Danglars assumed his majestic air, and settled
himself in his easy-chair.

Morcerf, usually so stiff and formal, accosted the banker in an affable
and smiling manner, and, feeling sure that the overture he was about to
make would be well received, he did not consider it necessary to adopt
any manœuvres in order to gain his end, but went at once straight to
the point.

40086m



“Well, baron,” said he, “here I am at last; some time has elapsed since
our plans were formed, and they are not yet executed.”

Morcerf paused at these words, quietly waiting till the cloud should
have dispersed which had gathered on the brow of Danglars, and which he
attributed to his silence; but, on the contrary, to his great surprise,
it grew darker and darker.

“To what do you allude, monsieur?” said Danglars; as if he were trying
in vain to guess at the possible meaning of the general’s words.

“Ah,” said Morcerf, “I see you are a stickler for forms, my dear sir,
and you would remind me that the ceremonial rites should not be
omitted. _Ma foi_, I beg your pardon, but as I have but one son, and it
is the first time I have ever thought of marrying him, I am still
serving my apprenticeship, you know; come, I will reform.”

And Morcerf with a forced smile arose, and, making a low bow to M.
Danglars, said:

“Baron, I have the honor of asking of you the hand of Mademoiselle
Eugénie Danglars for my son, the Vicomte Albert de Morcerf.”

But Danglars, instead of receiving this address in the favorable manner
which Morcerf had expected, knit his brow, and without inviting the
count, who was still standing, to take a seat, he said:

“Monsieur, it will be necessary to reflect before I give you an
answer.”

“To reflect?” said Morcerf, more and more astonished; “have you not had
enough time for reflection during the eight years which have elapsed
since this marriage was first discussed between us?”

“Count,” said the banker, “things are constantly occurring in the world
to induce us to lay aside our most established opinions, or at all
events to cause us to remodel them according to the change of
circumstances, which may have placed affairs in a totally different
light to that in which we at first viewed them.”

“I do not understand you, baron,” said Morcerf.

“What I mean to say is this, sir,—that during the last fortnight
unforeseen circumstances have occurred——”

“Excuse me,” said Morcerf, “but is it a play we are acting?”

“A play?”

“Yes, for it is like one; pray let us come more to the point, and
endeavor thoroughly to understand each other.”

“That is quite my desire.”

“You have seen M. de Monte Cristo have you not?”

“I see him very often,” said Danglars, drawing himself up; “he is a
particular friend of mine.”

“Well, in one of your late conversations with him, you said that I
appeared to be forgetful and irresolute concerning this marriage, did
you not?”

“I did say so.”

“Well, here I am, proving at once that I am really neither the one nor
the other, by entreating you to keep your promise on that score.”

Danglars did not answer.

“Have you so soon changed your mind,” added Morcerf, “or have you only
provoked my request that you may have the pleasure of seeing me
humbled?”

Danglars, seeing that if he continued the conversation in the same tone
in which he had begun it, the whole thing might turn out to his own
disadvantage, turned to Morcerf, and said:

“Count, you must doubtless be surprised at my reserve, and I assure you
it costs me much to act in such a manner towards you; but, believe me
when I say that imperative necessity has imposed the painful task upon
me.”

“These are all so many empty words, my dear sir,” said Morcerf: “they
might satisfy a new acquaintance, but the Comte de Morcerf does not
rank in that list; and when a man like him comes to another, recal