imilian. A last but
final hope was concealed by the young man in the effect of this
interview, and therefore he had suggested it. Morrel shook his head. “I
saw her this morning, and bade her adieu.”

“Have you no particular commands to leave with me, my father?” inquired
Maximilian in a faltering voice.

“Yes; my son, and a sacred command.”

“Say it, my father.”

“The house of Thomson & French is the only one who, from humanity, or,
it may be, selfishness—it is not for me to read men’s hearts—has had
any pity for me. Its agent, who will in ten minutes present himself to
receive the amount of a bill of 287,500 francs, I will not say granted,
but offered me three months. Let this house be the first repaid, my
son, and respect this man.”

“Father, I will,” said Maximilian.

“And now, once more, adieu,” said Morrel. “Go, leave me; I would be
alone. You will find my will in the secretaire in my bedroom.”

The young man remained standing and motionless, having but the force of
will and not the power of execution.

“Hear me, Maximilian,” said his father. “Suppose I were a soldier like
you, and ordered to carry a certain redoubt, and you knew I must be
killed in the assault, would you not say to me, as you said just now,
‘Go, father; for you are dishonored by delay, and death is preferable
to shame!’”

“Yes, yes,” said the young man, “yes;” and once again embracing his
father with convulsive pressure, he said, “Be it so, my father.”

And he rushed out of the study. When his son had left him, Morrel
remained an instant standing with his eyes fixed on the door; then
putting forth his arm, he pulled the bell. After a moment’s interval,
Cocles appeared.

It was no longer the same man—the fearful revelations of the three last
days had crushed him. This thought—the house of Morrel is about to stop
payment—bent him to the earth more than twenty years would otherwise
have done.

“My worthy Cocles,” said Morrel in a tone impossible to describe, “do
you remain in the antechamber. When the gentleman who came three months
ago—the agent of Thomson & French—arrives, announce his arrival to me.”

Cocles made no reply; he made a sign with his head, went into the
anteroom, and seated himself. Morrel fell back in his chair, his eyes
fixed on the clock; there were seven minutes left, that was all. The
hand moved on with incredible rapidity, he seemed to see its motion.

What passed in the mind of this man at the supreme moment of his agony
cannot be told in words. He was still comparatively young, he was
surrounded by the loving care of a devoted family, but he had convinced
himself by a course of reasoning, illogical perhaps, yet certainly
plausible, that he must separate himself from all he held dear in the
world, even life itself. To form the slightest idea of his feelings,
one must have seen his face with its expression of enforced resignation
and its tear-moistened eyes raised to heaven. The minute hand moved on.
The pistols were loaded; he stretched forth his hand, took one up, and
murmured his daughter’s name. Then he laid it down, seized his pen, and
wrote a few words. It seemed to him as if he had not taken a sufficient
farewell of his beloved daughter. Then he turned again to the clock,
counting time now not by minutes, but by seconds.

He took up the deadly weapon again, his lips parted and his eyes fixed
on the clock, and then shuddered at the click of the trigger as he
cocked the pistol. At this moment of mortal anguish the cold sweat came
forth upon his brow, a pang stronger than death clutched at his
heart-strings. He heard the door of the staircase creak on its
hinges—the clock gave its warning to strike eleven—the door of his
study opened. Morrel did not turn round—he expected these words of
Cocles, “The agent of Thomson & French.”

He placed the muzzle of the pistol between his teeth. Suddenly he heard
a cry—it was his daughter’s voice. He turned and saw Jul