to, putting the light near his face.

“Well, the abbé—the Abbé Busoni.” Monte Cristo took off the wig which
disfigured him, and let fall his black hair, which added so much to the
beauty of his pallid features.

“Oh?” said Caderousse, thunderstruck, “but for that black hair, I
should say you were the Englishman, Lord Wilmore.”

“I am neither the Abbé Busoni nor Lord Wilmore,” said Monte Cristo;
“think again,—do you not recollect me?”

There was a magic effect in the count’s words, which once more revived
the exhausted powers of the miserable man.

“Yes, indeed,” said he; “I think I have seen you and known you
formerly.”

“Yes, Caderousse, you have seen me; you knew me once.”

“Who, then, are you? and why, if you knew me, do you let me die?”

“Because nothing can save you; your wounds are mortal. Had it been
possible to save you, I should have considered it another proof of
God’s mercy, and I would again have endeavored to restore you, I swear
by my father’s tomb.”

“By your father’s tomb!” said Caderousse, supported by a supernatural
power, and half-raising himself to see more distinctly the man who had
just taken the oath which all men hold sacred; “who, then, are you?”

The count had watched the approach of death. He knew this was the last
struggle. He approached the dying man, and, leaning over him with a
calm and melancholy look, he whispered, “I am—I am——”

And his almost closed lips uttered a name so low that the count himself
appeared afraid to hear it. Caderousse, who had raised himself on his
knees, and stretched out his arm, tried to draw back, then clasping his
hands, and raising them with a desperate effort, “Oh, my God, my God!”
said he, “pardon me for having denied thee; thou dost exist, thou art
indeed man’s father in heaven, and his judge on earth. My God, my Lord,
I have long despised thee! Pardon me, my God; receive me, Oh, my Lord!”

Caderousse sighed deeply, and fell back with a groan. The blood no
longer flowed from his wounds. He was dead.

“_One!_” said the count mysteriously, his eyes fixed on the corpse,
disfigured by so awful a death.

Ten minutes afterwards the surgeon and the procureur arrived, the one
accompanied by the porter, the other by Ali, and were received by the
Abbé Busoni, who was praying by the side of the corpse.



 Chapter 84. Beauchamp

The daring attempt to rob the count was the topic of conversation
throughout Paris for the next fortnight. The dying man had signed a
deposition declaring Benedetto to be the assassin. The police had
orders to make the strictest search for the murderer. Caderousse’s
knife, dark lantern, bunch of keys, and clothing, excepting the
waistcoat, which could not be found, were deposited at the registry;
the corpse was conveyed to the morgue. The count told everyone that
this adventure had happened during his absence at Auteuil, and that he
only knew what was related by the Abbé Busoni, who that evening, by
mere chance, had requested to pass the night in his house, to examine
some valuable books in his library.

Bertuccio alone turned pale whenever Benedetto’s name was mentioned in
his presence, but there was no reason why anyone should notice his
doing so.

Villefort, being called on to prove the crime, was preparing his brief
with the same ardor that he was accustomed to exercise when required to
speak in criminal cases.

But three weeks had already passed, and the most diligent search had
been unsuccessful; the attempted robbery and the murder of the robber
by his comrade were almost forgotten in anticipation of the approaching
marriage of Mademoiselle Danglars to the Count Andrea Cavalcanti. It
was expected that this wedding would shortly take place, as the young
man was received at the banker’s as the betrothed.

Letters had been despatched to M. Cavalcanti, as the count’s father,
who highly approved of the union, regretted his inability to leave
Parma at that time, and