, your wife, perhaps your son.”

Villefort, suffocating, pressed the doctor’s arm.

40124m



“Listen,” cried he; “pity me—help me! No, my daughter is not guilty. If
you drag us both before a tribunal I will still say, ‘No, my daughter
is not guilty;—there is no crime in my house. I will not acknowledge a
crime in my house; for when crime enters a dwelling, it is like
death—it does not come alone.’ Listen. What does it signify to you if I
am murdered? Are you my friend? Are you a man? Have you a heart? No,
you are a physician! Well, I tell you I will not drag my daughter
before a tribunal, and give her up to the executioner! The bare idea
would kill me—would drive me like a madman to dig my heart out with my
finger-nails! And if you were mistaken, doctor—if it were not my
daughter—if I should come one day, pale as a spectre, and say to you,
‘Assassin, you have killed my child!’—hold—if that should happen,
although I am a Christian, M. d’Avrigny, I should kill myself.”

“Well,” said the doctor, after a moment’s silence, “I will wait.”

Villefort looked at him as if he had doubted his words.

“Only,” continued M. d’Avrigny, with a slow and solemn tone, “if anyone
falls ill in your house, if you feel yourself attacked, do not send for
me, for I will come no more. I will consent to share this dreadful
secret with you, but I will not allow shame and remorse to grow and
increase in my conscience, as crime and misery will in your house.”

“Then you abandon me, doctor?”

“Yes, for I can follow you no farther, and I only stop at the foot of
the scaffold. Some further discovery will be made, which will bring
this dreadful tragedy to a close. Adieu.”

“I entreat you, doctor!”

“All the horrors that disturb my thoughts make your house odious and
fatal. Adieu, sir.”

“One word—one single word more, doctor! You go, leaving me in all the
horror of my situation, after increasing it by what you have revealed
to me. But what will be reported of the sudden death of the poor old
servant?”

“True,” said M. d’Avrigny; “we will return.”

The doctor went out first, followed by M. de Villefort. The terrified
servants were on the stairs and in the passage where the doctor would
pass.

“Sir,” said d’Avrigny to Villefort, so loud that all might hear, “poor
Barrois has led too sedentary a life of late; accustomed formerly to
ride on horseback, or in the carriage, to the four corners of Europe,
the monotonous walk around that armchair has killed him—his blood has
thickened. He was stout, had a short, thick neck; he was attacked with
apoplexy, and I was called in too late. By the way,” added he in a low
tone, “take care to throw away that cup of syrup of violets in the
ashes.”

The doctor, without shaking hands with Villefort, without adding a word
to what he had said, went out, amid the tears and lamentations of the
whole household. The same evening all Villefort’s servants, who had
assembled in the kitchen, and had a long consultation, came to tell
Madame de Villefort that they wished to leave. No entreaty, no
proposition of increased wages, could induce them to remain; to every
argument they replied, “We must go, for death is in this house.”

They all left, in spite of prayers and entreaties, testifying their
regret at leaving so good a master and mistress, and especially
Mademoiselle Valentine, so good, so kind, and so gentle.

Villefort looked at Valentine as they said this. She was in tears, and,
strange as it was, in spite of the emotions he felt at the sight of
these tears, he looked also at Madame de Villefort, and it appeared to
him as if a slight gloomy smile had passed over her thin lips, like a
meteor seen passing inauspiciously between two clouds in a stormy sky.



 Chapter 81. The Room of the Retired Baker

The evening of the day on which the Count of Morcerf had left Danglars’
house with feelings of shame and anger at the rejection of the
projected allian