roidered uniform! I declare, I expect to look magnificent in
it, and chose that regiment only from vanity.”

Mercédès sighed while endeavoring to smile; the devoted mother felt
that she ought not to allow the whole weight of the sacrifice to fall
upon her son.

“Well, now you understand, mother!” continued Albert; “here are more
than 4,000 francs settled on you; upon these you can live at least two
years.”

“Do you think so?” said Mercédès.

These words were uttered in so mournful a tone that their real meaning
did not escape Albert; he felt his heart beat, and taking his mother’s
hand within his own he said, tenderly:

“Yes, you will live!”

“I shall live!—then you will not leave me, Albert?”

“Mother, I must go,” said Albert in a firm, calm voice; “you love me
too well to wish me to remain useless and idle with you; besides, I
have signed.”

50145m



“You will obey your own wish and the will of Heaven!”

“Not my own wish, mother, but reason—necessity. Are we not two
despairing creatures? What is life to you?—Nothing. What is life to
me?—Very little without you, mother; for believe me, but for you I
should have ceased to live on the day I doubted my father and renounced
his name. Well, I will live, if you promise me still to hope; and if
you grant me the care of your future prospects, you will redouble my
strength. Then I will go to the governor of Algeria; he has a royal
heart, and is essentially a soldier; I will tell him my gloomy story. I
will beg him to turn his eyes now and then towards me, and if he keep
his word and interest himself for me, in six months I shall be an
officer, or dead. If I am an officer, your fortune is certain, for I
shall have money enough for both, and, moreover, a name we shall both
be proud of, since it will be our own. If I am killed—well then mother,
you can also die, and there will be an end of our misfortunes.”

“It is well,” replied Mercédès, with her eloquent glance; “you are
right, my love; let us prove to those who are watching our actions that
we are worthy of compassion.”

“But let us not yield to gloomy apprehensions,” said the young man; “I
assure you we are, or rather we shall be, very happy. You are a woman
at once full of spirit and resignation; I have become simple in my
tastes, and am without passion, I hope. Once in service, I shall be
rich—once in M. Dantès’ house, you will be at rest. Let us strive, I
beseech you,—let us strive to be cheerful.”

“Yes, let us strive, for you ought to live, and to be happy, Albert.”

“And so our division is made, mother,” said the young man, affecting
ease of mind. “We can now part; come, I shall engage your passage.”

“And you, my dear boy?”

“I shall stay here for a few days longer; we must accustom ourselves to
parting. I want recommendations and some information relative to
Africa. I will join you again at Marseilles.”

“Well, be it so—let us part,” said Mercédès, folding around her
shoulders the only shawl she had taken away, and which accidentally
happened to be a valuable black cashmere. Albert gathered up his papers
hastily, rang the bell to pay the thirty francs he owed to the
landlord, and offering his arm to his mother, they descended the
stairs.

Someone was walking down before them, and this person, hearing the
rustling of a silk dress, turned around. “Debray!” muttered Albert.

“You, Morcerf?” replied the secretary, resting on the stairs. Curiosity
had vanquished the desire of preserving his _incognito_, and he was
recognized. It was, indeed, strange in this unknown spot to find the
young man whose misfortunes had made so much noise in Paris.

“Morcerf!” repeated Debray. Then noticing in the dim light the still
youthful and veiled figure of Madame de Morcerf:

“Pardon me,” he added with a smile, “I leave you, Albert.” Albert
understood his thoughts.

“Mother,” he said, turning towards Mercédès, “this is M. Debray,
secretary of the Minister f