 when I was with you. When
you were away from me, you were still present in my art.... Of course,
I never let you know anything about this. It would have been
impossible. You would not have understood it. I hardly understood it
myself. I only knew that I had seen perfection face to face, and that
the world had become wonderful to my eyes—too wonderful, perhaps, for
in such mad worships there is peril, the peril of losing them, no less
than the peril of keeping them.... Weeks and weeks went on, and I grew
more and more absorbed in you. Then came a new development. I had drawn
you as Paris in dainty armour, and as Adonis with huntsman’s cloak and
polished boar-spear. Crowned with heavy lotus-blossoms you had sat on
the prow of Adrian’s barge, gazing across the green turbid Nile. You
had leaned over the still pool of some Greek woodland and seen in the
water’s silent silver the marvel of your own face. And it had all been
what art should be—unconscious, ideal, and remote. One day, a fatal day
I sometimes think, I determined to paint a wonderful portrait of you as
you actually are, not in the costume of dead ages, but in your own
dress and in your own time. Whether it was the realism of the method,
or the mere wonder of your own personality, thus directly presented to
me without mist or veil, I cannot tell. But I know that as I worked at
it, every flake and film of colour seemed to me to reveal my secret. I
grew afraid that others would know of my idolatry. I felt, Dorian, that
I had told too much, that I had put too much of myself into it. Then it
was that I resolved never to allow the picture to be exhibited. You
were a little annoyed; but then you did not realize all that it meant
to me. Harry, to whom I talked about it, laughed at me. But I did not
mind that. When the picture was finished, and I sat alone with it, I
felt that I was right.... Well, after a few days the thing left my
studio, and as soon as I had got rid of the intolerable fascination of
its presence, it seemed to me that I had been foolish in imagining that
I had seen anything in it, more than that you were extremely
good-looking and that I could paint. Even now I cannot help feeling
that it is a mistake to think that the passion one feels in creation is
ever really shown in the work one creates. Art is always more abstract
than we fancy. Form and colour tell us of form and colour—that is all.
It often seems to me that art conceals the artist far more completely
than it ever reveals him. And so when I got this offer from Paris, I
determined to make your portrait the principal thing in my exhibition.
It never occurred to me that you would refuse. I see now that you were
right. The picture cannot be shown. You must not be angry with me,
Dorian, for what I have told you. As I said to Harry, once, you are
made to be worshipped.”

Dorian Gray drew a long breath. The colour came back to his cheeks, and
a smile played about his lips. The peril was over. He was safe for the
time. Yet he could not help feeling infinite pity for the painter who
had just made this strange confession to him, and wondered if he
himself would ever be so dominated by the personality of a friend. Lord
Henry had the charm of being very dangerous. But that was all. He was
too clever and too cynical to be really fond of. Would there ever be
some one who would fill him with a strange idolatry? Was that one of
the things that life had in store?

“It is extraordinary to me, Dorian,” said Hallward, “that you should
have seen this in the portrait. Did you really see it?”

“I saw something in it,” he answered, “something that seemed to me very
curious.”

“Well, you don’t mind my looking at the thing now?”

Dorian shook his head. “You must not ask me that, Basil. I could not
possibly let you stand in front of that picture.”

“You will some day, surely?”

“Never.”

“Well, perhaps you are right. And now good-bye, Dorian. You have been
the