of the richest and noblest families of Rome accompanied them
with that Italian freedom which has not its parallel in any other
country in the world. They were attired as peasants of Albano,
Velletri, Civita-Castellana, and Sora. We need hardly add that these
peasant costumes, like those of the young women, were brilliant with
gold and jewels.

“Carmela wished to form a quadrille, but there was one lady wanting.
Carmela looked all around her, but not one of the guests had a costume
similar to her own, or those of her companions. The Count of San-Felice
pointed out Teresa, who was hanging on Luigi’s arm in a group of
peasants.

“‘Will you allow me, father?’ said Carmela.

“‘Certainly,’ replied the count, ‘are we not in Carnival time?’

“Carmela turned towards the young man who was talking with her, and
saying a few words to him, pointed with her finger to Teresa. The young
man looked, bowed in obedience, and then went to Teresa, and invited
her to dance in a quadrille directed by the count’s daughter. Teresa
felt a flush pass over her face; she looked at Luigi, who could not
refuse his assent. Luigi slowly relinquished Teresa’s arm, which he had
held beneath his own, and Teresa, accompanied by her elegant cavalier,
took her appointed place with much agitation in the aristocratic
quadrille. Certainly, in the eyes of an artist, the exact and strict
costume of Teresa had a very different character from that of Carmela
and her companions; and Teresa was frivolous and coquettish, and thus
the embroidery and muslins, the cashmere waist-girdles, all dazzled
her, and the reflection of sapphires and diamonds almost turned her
giddy brain.

“Luigi felt a sensation hitherto unknown arising in his mind. It was
like an acute pain which gnawed at his heart, and then thrilled through
his whole body. He followed with his eye each movement of Teresa and
her cavalier; when their hands touched, he felt as though he should
swoon; every pulse beat with violence, and it seemed as though a bell
were ringing in his ears. When they spoke, although Teresa listened
timidly and with downcast eyes to the conversation of her cavalier, as
Luigi could read in the ardent looks of the good-looking young man that
his language was that of praise, it seemed as if the whole world was
turning round with him, and all the voices of hell were whispering in
his ears ideas of murder and assassination. Then fearing that his
paroxysm might get the better of him, he clutched with one hand the
branch of a tree against which he was leaning, and with the other
convulsively grasped the dagger with a carved handle which was in his
belt, and which, unwittingly, he drew from the scabbard from time to
time.

“Luigi was jealous!

“He felt that, influenced by her ambitions and coquettish disposition,
Teresa might escape him.

“The young peasant girl, at first timid and scared, soon recovered
herself. We have said that Teresa was handsome, but this is not all;
Teresa was endowed with all those wild graces which are so much more
potent than our affected and studied elegancies. She had almost all the
honors of the quadrille, and if she were envious of the Count of
San-Felice’s daughter, we will not undertake to say that Carmela was
not jealous of her. And with overpowering compliments her handsome
cavalier led her back to the place whence he had taken her, and where
Luigi awaited her. Twice or thrice during the dance the young girl had
glanced at Luigi, and each time she saw that he was pale and that his
features were agitated, once even the blade of his knife, half drawn
from its sheath, had dazzled her eyes with its sinister glare. Thus, it
was almost tremblingly that she resumed her lover’s arm. The quadrille
had been most perfect, and it was evident there was a great demand for
a repetition, Carmela alone objecting to it, but the Count of
San-Felice besought his daughter so earnestly, that she acceded.

“One of th