wer which has destroyed my hopes and my fortune, and may
blast the prospects of my child also, as it is all occasioned by an old
man relapsed into second childhood.”

30183m



“What do you say?” said the count; “900,000 francs? It is indeed a sum
which might be regretted even by a philosopher. And who is the cause of
all this annoyance?”

“My father, as I told you.”

“M. Noirtier? But I thought you told me he had become entirely
paralyzed, and that all his faculties were completely destroyed?”

“Yes, his bodily faculties, for he can neither move nor speak,
nevertheless he thinks, acts, and wills in the manner I have described.
I left him about five minutes ago, and he is now occupied in dictating
his will to two notaries.”

“But to do this he must have spoken?”

“He has done better than that—he has made himself understood.”

“How was such a thing possible?”

“By the help of his eyes, which are still full of life, and, as you
perceive, possess the power of inflicting mortal injury.”

“My dear,” said Madame de Villefort, who had just entered the room,
“perhaps you exaggerate the evil.”

“Good-morning, madame,” said the count, bowing.



Madame de Villefort acknowledged the salutation with one of her most
gracious smiles.

“What is this that M. de Villefort has been telling me?” demanded Monte
Cristo “and what incomprehensible misfortune——”

“Incomprehensible is the word!” interrupted the procureur, shrugging
his shoulders. “It is an old man’s caprice!”

“And is there no means of making him revoke his decision?”

“Yes,” said Madame de Villefort; “and it is still entirely in the power
of my husband to cause the will, which is now in prejudice of
Valentine, to be altered in her favor.”

The count, who perceived that M. and Madame de Villefort were beginning
to speak in parables, appeared to pay no attention to the conversation,
and feigned to be busily engaged in watching Edward, who was
mischievously pouring some ink into the bird’s water-glass.

“My dear,” said Villefort, in answer to his wife, “you know I have
never been accustomed to play the patriarch in my family, nor have I
ever considered that the fate of a universe was to be decided by my
nod. Nevertheless, it is necessary that my will should be respected in
my family, and that the folly of an old man and the caprice of a child
should not be allowed to overturn a project which I have entertained
for so many years. The Baron d’Épinay was my friend, as you know, and
an alliance with his son is the most suitable thing that could possibly
be arranged.”

“Do you think,” said Madame de Villefort, “that Valentine is in league
with him? She has always been opposed to this marriage, and I should
not be at all surprised if what we have just seen and heard is nothing
but the execution of a plan concerted between them.”

“Madame,” said Villefort, “believe me, a fortune of 900,000 francs is
not so easily renounced.”

“She could, nevertheless, make up her mind to renounce the world, sir,
since it is only about a year ago that she herself proposed entering a
convent.”

“Never mind,” replied Villefort; “I say that this marriage _shall_ be
consummated.”

“Notwithstanding your father’s wishes to the contrary?” said Madame de
Villefort, selecting a new point of attack. “That is a serious thing.”

Monte Cristo, who pretended not to be listening, heard however, every
word that was said.

30185m



“Madame,” replied Villefort “I can truly say that I have always
entertained a high respect for my father, because, to the natural
feeling of relationship was added the consciousness of his moral
superiority. The name of father is sacred in two senses; he should be
reverenced as the author of our being and as a master whom we ought to
obey. But, under the present circumstances, I am justified in doubting
the wisdom of an old man who, because he hated the father, vents his
anger on the son. It would be 