therefore shall not
put up with them from my friends. You insist on my contradicting the
article relating to General Fernand, an article with which, I assure
you on my word of honor, I had nothing whatever to do?”

“Yes, I insist on it,” said Albert, whose mind was beginning to get
bewildered with the excitement of his feelings.

“And if I refuse to retract, you wish to fight, do you?” said Beauchamp
in a calm tone.

“Yes,” replied Albert, raising his voice.

“Well,” said Beauchamp, “here is my answer, my dear sir. The article
was not inserted by me—I was not even aware of it; but you have, by the
step you have taken, called my attention to the paragraph in question,
and it will remain until it shall be either contradicted or confirmed
by someone who has a right to do so.”

“Sir,” said Albert, rising, “I will do myself the honor of sending my
seconds to you, and you will be kind enough to arrange with them the
place of meeting and the weapons.”

“Certainly, my dear sir.”

“And this evening, if you please, or tomorrow at the latest, we will
meet.”

“No, no, I will be on the ground at the proper time; but in my opinion
(and I have a right to dictate the preliminaries, as it is I who have
received the provocation)—in my opinion the time ought not to be yet. I
know you to be well skilled in the management of the sword, while I am
only moderately so; I know, too, that you are a good marksman—there we
are about equal. I know that a duel between us two would be a serious
affair, because you are brave, and I am brave also. I do not therefore
wish either to kill you, or to be killed myself without a cause. Now, I
am going to put a question to you, and one very much to the purpose
too. Do you insist on this retractation so far as to kill me if I do
not make it, although I have repeated more than once, and affirmed on
my honor, that I was ignorant of the thing with which you charge me,
and although I still declare that it is impossible for anyone but you
to recognize the Count of Morcerf under the name of Fernand?”

“I maintain my original resolution.”

“Very well, my dear sir; then I consent to cut throats with you. But I
require three weeks’ preparation; at the end of that time I shall come
and say to you, ‘The assertion is false, and I retract it,’ or ‘The
assertion is true,’ when I shall immediately draw the sword from its
sheath, or the pistols from the case, whichever you please.”

“Three weeks!” cried Albert; “they will pass as slowly as three
centuries when I am all the time suffering dishonor.”

“Had you continued to remain on amicable terms with me, I should have
said, ‘Patience, my friend;’ but you have constituted yourself my
enemy, therefore I say, ‘What does that signify to me, sir?’”

“Well, let it be three weeks then,” said Morcerf; “but remember, at the
expiration of that time no delay or subterfuge will justify you in——”

“M. Albert de Morcerf,” said Beauchamp, rising in his turn, “I cannot
throw you out of window for three weeks—that is to say, for twenty-four
days to come—nor have you any right to split my skull open till that
time has elapsed. Today is the 29th of August; the 21st of September
will, therefore, be the conclusion of the term agreed on, and till that
time arrives—and it is the advice of a gentleman which I am about to
give you—till then we will refrain from growling and barking like two
dogs chained within sight of each other.”

When he had concluded his speech, Beauchamp bowed coldly to Albert,
turned his back upon him, and went to the press-room. Albert vented his
anger on a pile of newspapers, which he sent flying all over the office
by switching them violently with his stick; after which ebullition he
departed—not, however, without walking several times to the door of the
press-room, as if he had half a mind to enter.

40104m



While Albert was lashing the front of his carriage in the same manner
that he had the newsp