l. You should install yourself here, and cheer my solitude.
I do not wish to be left alone.”

“Mother,” said the young man, “you know how gladly I would obey your
wish, but an urgent and important affair obliges me to leave you for
the whole evening.”

“Well,” replied Mercédès, sighing, “go, Albert; I will not make you a
slave to your filial piety.”

Albert pretended he did not hear, bowed to his mother, and quitted her.
Scarcely had he shut her door, when Mercédès called a confidential
servant, and ordered him to follow Albert wherever he should go that
evening, and to come and tell her immediately what he observed. Then
she rang for her lady’s maid, and, weak as she was, she dressed, in
order to be ready for whatever might happen. The footman’s mission was
an easy one. Albert went to his room, and dressed with unusual care. At
ten minutes to eight Beauchamp arrived; he had seen Château-Renaud, who
had promised to be in the orchestra before the curtain was raised. Both
got into Albert’s _coupé_; and, as the young man had no reason to
conceal where he was going, he called aloud, “To the Opera.” In his
impatience he arrived before the beginning of the performance.

40221m



Château-Renaud was at his post; apprised by Beauchamp of the
circumstances, he required no explanation from Albert. The conduct of
the son in seeking to avenge his father was so natural that
Château-Renaud did not seek to dissuade him, and was content with
renewing his assurances of devotion. Debray was not yet come, but
Albert knew that he seldom lost a scene at the Opera.

Albert wandered about the theatre until the curtain was drawn up. He
hoped to meet with M. de Monte Cristo either in the lobby or on the
stairs. The bell summoned him to his seat, and he entered the orchestra
with Château-Renaud and Beauchamp. But his eyes scarcely quitted the
box between the columns, which remained obstinately closed during the
whole of the first act. At last, as Albert was looking at his watch for
about the hundredth time, at the beginning of the second act the door
opened, and Monte Cristo entered, dressed in black, and, leaning over
the front of the box, looked around the pit. Morrel followed him, and
looked also for his sister and brother in-law; he soon discovered them
in another box, and kissed his hand to them.

The count, in his survey of the pit, encountered a pale face and
threatening eyes, which evidently sought to gain his attention. He
recognized Albert, but thought it better not to notice him, as he
looked so angry and discomposed. Without communicating his thoughts to
his companion, he sat down, drew out his opera-glass, and looked
another way. Although apparently not noticing Albert, he did not,
however, lose sight of him, and when the curtain fell at the end of the
second act, he saw him leave the orchestra with his two friends. Then
his head was seen passing at the back of the boxes, and the count knew
that the approaching storm was intended to fall on him. He was at the
moment conversing cheerfully with Morrel, but he was well prepared for
what might happen.

The door opened, and Monte Cristo, turning round, saw Albert, pale and
trembling, followed by Beauchamp and Château-Renaud.

“Well,” cried he, with that benevolent politeness which distinguished
his salutation from the common civilities of the world, “my cavalier
has attained his object. Good-evening, M. de Morcerf.”

The countenance of this man, who possessed such extraordinary control
over his feelings, expressed the most perfect cordiality. Morrel only
then recollected the letter he had received from the viscount, in
which, without assigning any reason, he begged him to go to the Opera,
but he understood that something terrible was brooding.

“We are not come here, sir, to exchange hypocritical expressions of
politeness, or false professions of friendship,” said Albert, “but to
demand an explanation.”

The young man’s