 leaning
against the wall, and about him was a pool of blood which poured forth
from three large wounds in his breast; there was a fourth gash, in
which a long table knife was plunged up to the handle.

“I stumbled over some object; I stooped to examine—it was the second
pistol, which had not gone off, probably from the powder being wet. I
approached the jeweller, who was not quite dead, and at the sound of my
footsteps and the creaking of the floor, he opened his eyes, fixed them
on me with an anxious and inquiring gaze, moved his lips as though
trying to speak, then, overcome by the effort, fell back and expired.

“This appalling sight almost bereft me of my senses, and finding that I
could no longer be of service to anyone in the house, my only desire
was to fly. I rushed towards the staircase, clutching my hair, and
uttering a groan of horror.

“Upon reaching the room below, I found five or six custom-house
officers, and two or three gendarmes—all heavily armed. They threw
themselves upon me. I made no resistance; I was no longer master of my
senses. When I strove to speak, a few inarticulate sounds alone escaped
my lips.

“As I noticed the significant manner in which the whole party pointed
to my blood-stained garments, I involuntarily surveyed myself, and then
I discovered that the thick warm drops that had so bedewed me as I lay
beneath the staircase must have been the blood of La Carconte. I
pointed to the spot where I had concealed myself.

“‘What does he mean?’ asked a gendarme.

“One of the officers went to the place I directed.

“‘He means,’ replied the man upon his return, ‘that he got in that
way;’ and he showed the hole I had made when I broke through.

“Then I saw that they took me for the assassin. I recovered force and
energy enough to free myself from the hands of those who held me, while
I managed to stammer forth:

“‘I did not do it! Indeed, indeed I did not!’

“A couple of gendarmes held the muzzles of their carbines against my
breast.

“‘Stir but a step,’ said they, ‘and you are a dead man.’

“‘Why should you threaten me with death,’ cried I, ‘when I have already
declared my innocence?’

“‘Tush, tush,’ cried the men; ‘keep your innocent stories to tell to
the judge at Nîmes. Meanwhile, come along with us; and the best advice
we can give you is to do so unresistingly.’

“Alas, resistance was far from my thoughts. I was utterly overpowered
by surprise and terror; and without a word I suffered myself to be
handcuffed and tied to a horse’s tail, and thus they took me to Nîmes.

“I had been tracked by a customs-officer, who had lost sight of me near
the tavern; feeling certain that I intended to pass the night there, he
had returned to summon his comrades, who just arrived in time to hear
the report of the pistol, and to take me in the midst of such
circumstantial proofs of my guilt as rendered all hopes of proving my
innocence utterly futile. One only chance was left me, that of
beseeching the magistrate before whom I was taken to cause every
inquiry to be made for the Abbé Busoni, who had stopped at the inn of
the Pont du Gard on that morning.

“If Caderousse had invented the story relative to the diamond, and
there existed no such person as the Abbé Busoni, then, indeed, I was
lost past redemption, or, at least, my life hung upon the feeble chance
of Caderousse himself being apprehended and confessing the whole truth.

“Two months passed away in hopeless expectation on my part, while I
must do the magistrate the justice to say that he used every means to
obtain information of the person I declared could exculpate me if he
would. Caderousse still evaded all pursuit, and I had resigned myself
to what seemed my inevitable fate. My trial was to come on at the
approaching assizes; when, on the 8th of September—that is to say,
precisely three months and five days after the events which had
perilled my life—the Abbé Busoni, whom I nev