shall be transmitted
to our children’s children, and shall always remind me that I owe my
life and the honor of my name to you,—for had this been known, oh,
Beauchamp, I should have destroyed myself; or,—no, my poor mother! I
could not have killed her by the same blow,—I should have fled from my
country.”

“Dear Albert,” said Beauchamp. But this sudden and factitious joy soon
forsook the young man, and was succeeded by a still greater grief.

“Well,” said Beauchamp, “what still oppresses you, my friend?”

40178m



“I am broken-hearted,” said Albert. “Listen, Beauchamp! I cannot thus,
in a moment relinquish the respect, the confidence, and pride with
which a father’s untarnished name inspires a son. Oh, Beauchamp,
Beauchamp, how shall I now approach mine? Shall I draw back my forehead
from his embrace, or withhold my hand from his? I am the most wretched
of men. Ah, my mother, my poor mother!” said Albert, gazing through his
tears at his mother’s portrait; “if you know this, how much must you
suffer!”

“Come,” said Beauchamp, taking both his hands, “take courage, my
friend.”

“But how came that first note to be inserted in your journal? Some
unknown enemy—an invisible foe—has done this.”

“The more must you fortify yourself, Albert. Let no trace of emotion be
visible on your countenance, bear your grief as the cloud bears within
it ruin and death—a fatal secret, known only when the storm bursts. Go,
my friend, reserve your strength for the moment when the crash shall
come.”

40179m



“You think, then, all is not over yet?” said Albert, horror-stricken.

“I think nothing, my friend; but all things are possible. By the way——”

“What?” said Albert, seeing that Beauchamp hesitated.

“Are you going to marry Mademoiselle Danglars?”

“Why do you ask me now?”

“Because the rupture or fulfilment of this engagement is connected with
the person of whom we were speaking.”

“How?” said Albert, whose brow reddened; “you think M. Danglars——”

“I ask you only how your engagement stands? Pray put no construction on
my words I do not mean they should convey, and give them no undue
weight.”

“No.” said Albert, “the engagement is broken off.”

“Well,” said Beauchamp. Then, seeing the young man was about to relapse
into melancholy, “Let us go out, Albert,” said he; “a ride in the wood
in the phaeton, or on horseback, will refresh you; we will then return
to breakfast, and you shall attend to your affairs, and I to mine.”

“Willingly,” said Albert; “but let us walk. I think a little exertion
would do me good.”

The two friends walked out on the fortress. When they arrived at the
Madeleine:

“Since we are out,” said Beauchamp, “let us call on M. de Monte Cristo;
he is admirably adapted to revive one’s spirits, because he never
interrogates, and in my opinion those who ask no questions are the best
comforters.”

“Gladly,” said Albert; “let us call—I love him.”



 Chapter 85. The Journey

Monte Cristo uttered a joyful exclamation on seeing the young men
together. “Ah, ha!” said he, “I hope all is over, explained and
settled.”

“Yes,” said Beauchamp; “the absurd reports have died away, and should
they be renewed, I would be the first to oppose them; so let us speak
no more of it.”

“Albert will tell you,” replied the count “that I gave him the same
advice. Look,” added he. “I am finishing the most execrable morning’s
work.”

“What is it?” said Albert; “arranging your papers, apparently.”

“My papers, thank God, no,—my papers are all in capital order, because
I have none; but M. Cavalcanti’s.”

“M. Cavalcanti’s?” asked Beauchamp.

“Yes; do you not know that this is a young man whom the count is
introducing?” said Morcerf.

“Let us not misunderstand each other,” replied Monte Cristo; “I
introduce no one, and certainly not M. Cavalcanti.”

“And who,” said Albert with a forced smile, “is to marry Mademoiselle
Danglars instead of me, which grieves