self, and jumped on the small boy’s shoulder.

“Don’t be frightened, Teddy,” said his father. “That’s his way of making
friends.”

“Ouch! He’s tickling under my chin,” said Teddy.

Rikki-tikki looked down between the boy’s collar and neck, snuffed at
his ear, and climbed down to the floor, where he sat rubbing his nose.

“Good gracious,” said Teddy’s mother, “and that’s a wild creature! I
suppose he’s so tame because we’ve been kind to him.”

“All mongooses are like that,” said her husband. “If Teddy doesn’t pick
him up by the tail, or try to put him in a cage, he’ll run in and out of
the house all day long. Let’s give him something to eat.”

They gave him a little piece of raw meat. Rikki-tikki liked it
immensely, and when it was finished he went out into the veranda and sat
in the sunshine and fluffed up his fur to make it dry to the roots. Then
he felt better.

“There are more things to find out about in this house,” he said to
himself, “than all my family could find out in all their lives. I shall
certainly stay and find out.”

He spent all that day roaming over the house. He nearly drowned himself
in the bath-tubs, put his nose into the ink on a writing table, and
burned it on the end of the big man’s cigar, for he climbed up in the
big man’s lap to see how writing was done. At nightfall he ran into
Teddy’s nursery to watch how kerosene lamps were lighted, and when Teddy
went to bed Rikki-tikki climbed up too. But he was a restless companion,
because he had to get up and attend to every noise all through the
night, and find out what made it. Teddy’s mother and father came in,
the last thing, to look at their boy, and Rikki-tikki was awake on
the pillow. “I don’t like that,” said Teddy’s mother. “He may bite the
child.” “He’ll do no such thing,” said the father. “Teddy’s safer with
that little beast than if he had a bloodhound to watch him. If a snake
came into the nursery now--”

But Teddy’s mother wouldn’t think of anything so awful.

Early in the morning Rikki-tikki came to early breakfast in the veranda
riding on Teddy’s shoulder, and they gave him banana and some boiled
egg. He sat on all their laps one after the other, because every
well-brought-up mongoose always hopes to be a house mongoose some day
and have rooms to run about in; and Rikki-tikki’s mother (she used to
live in the general’s house at Segowlee) had carefully told Rikki what
to do if ever he came across white men.

Then Rikki-tikki went out into the garden to see what was to be seen.
It was a large garden, only half cultivated, with bushes, as big as
summer-houses, of Marshal Niel roses, lime and orange trees, clumps of
bamboos, and thickets of high grass. Rikki-tikki licked his lips. “This
is a splendid hunting-ground,” he said, and his tail grew bottle-brushy
at the thought of it, and he scuttled up and down the garden, snuffing
here and there till he heard very sorrowful voices in a thorn-bush.

It was Darzee, the Tailorbird, and his wife. They had made a beautiful
nest by pulling two big leaves together and stitching them up the edges
with fibers, and had filled the hollow with cotton and downy fluff. The
nest swayed to and fro, as they sat on the rim and cried.

“What is the matter?” asked Rikki-tikki.

“We are very miserable,” said Darzee. “One of our babies fell out of the
nest yesterday and Nag ate him.”

“H’m!” said Rikki-tikki, “that is very sad--but I am a stranger here.
Who is Nag?”

Darzee and his wife only cowered down in the nest without answering, for
from the thick grass at the foot of the bush there came a low hiss--a
horrid cold sound that made Rikki-tikki jump back two clear feet. Then
inch by inch out of the grass rose up the head and spread hood of Nag,
the big black cobra, and he was five feet long from tongue to tail.
When he had lifted one-third of himself clear of the ground, he stayed
balancing to and fro exactly as a dandelion tuft balances in the w