roness bore the highly-colored
tinge of his own heated imagination. Already excited by the wonderful
stories related of the count by de Morcerf, it is no wonder that Madame
Danglars eagerly listened to, and fully credited, all the additional
circumstances detailed by Debray. This posing at the piano and over the
album was only a little ruse adopted by way of precaution. A most
gracious welcome and unusual smile were bestowed on M. Danglars; the
count, in return for his gentlemanly bow, received a formal though
graceful courtesy, while Lucien exchanged with the count a sort of
distant recognition, and with Danglars a free and easy nod.

“Baroness,” said Danglars, “give me leave to present to you the Count
of Monte Cristo, who has been most warmly recommended to me by my
correspondents at Rome. I need but mention one fact to make all the
ladies in Paris court his notice, and that is, that he has come to take
up his abode in Paris for a year, during which brief period he proposes
to spend six millions of money. That means balls, dinners, and lawn
parties without end, in all of which I trust the count will remember
us, as he may depend upon it we shall him, in our own humble
entertainments.”

In spite of the gross flattery and coarseness of this address, Madame
Danglars could not forbear gazing with considerable interest on a man
capable of expending six millions in twelve months, and who had
selected Paris for the scene of his princely extravagance.

“And when did you arrive here?” inquired she.

“Yesterday morning, madame.”

“Coming, as usual, I presume, from the extreme end of the globe? Pardon
me—at least, such I have heard is your custom.”

“Nay, madame. This time I have merely come from Cadiz.”

“You have selected a most unfavorable moment for your first visit.
Paris is a horrible place in summer. Balls, parties, and _fêtes_ are
over; the Italian opera is in London; the French opera everywhere
except in Paris. As for the Théatre Français, you know, of course, that
it is nowhere. The only amusements left us are the indifferent races at
the Champ-de-Mars and Satory. Do you propose entering any horses at
either of these races, count?”

“I shall do whatever they do at Paris, madame, if I have the good
fortune to find someone who will initiate me into the prevalent ideas
of amusement.”

“Are you fond of horses, count?”

“I have passed a considerable part of my life in the East, madame, and
you are doubtless aware that the Orientals value only two things—the
fine breeding of their horses and the beauty of their women.”

“Nay, count,” said the baroness, “it would have been somewhat more
gallant to have placed the ladies first.”

“You see, madame, how rightly I spoke when I said I required a
preceptor to guide me in all my sayings and doings here.”

At this instant the favorite attendant of Madame Danglars entered the
boudoir; approaching her mistress, she spoke some words in an
undertone. Madame Danglars turned very pale, then exclaimed:

“I cannot believe it; the thing is impossible.”

“I assure you, madame,” replied the woman, “it is as I have said.”

Turning impatiently towards her husband, Madame Danglars demanded, “Is
this true?”

“Is what true, madame?” inquired Danglars, visibly agitated.

“What my maid tells me.”

“But what does she tell you?”

“That when my coachman was about to harness the horses to my carriage,
he discovered that they had been removed from the stables without his
knowledge. I desire to know what is the meaning of this?”

“Be kind enough, madame, to listen to me,” said Danglars.

“Oh, yes; I will listen, monsieur, for I am most curious to hear what
explanation you will give. These two gentlemen shall decide between us;
but, first, I will state the case to them. Gentlemen,” continued the
baroness, “among the ten horses in the stables of Baron Danglars, are
two that belong exclusively to me—a pair of the handsomest and mos