t she fancied the count would speak to her,
while on his side the count thought she was about to address him; but
both remained silent, and after a mere bow, Monte Cristo directed his
steps to Albert, who received him cordially.

“Have you seen my mother?” asked Albert.

“I have just had the pleasure,” replied the count; “but I have not seen
your father.”

“See, he is down there, talking politics with that little group of
great geniuses.”

“Indeed?” said Monte Cristo; “and so those gentlemen down there are men
of great talent. I should not have guessed it. And for what kind of
talent are they celebrated? You know there are different sorts.”

“That tall, harsh-looking man is very learned, he discovered, in the
neighborhood of Rome, a kind of lizard with a vertebra more than
lizards usually have, and he immediately laid his discovery before the
Institute. The thing was discussed for a long time, but finally decided
in his favor. I can assure you the vertebra made a great noise in the
learned world, and the gentleman, who was only a knight of the Legion
of Honor, was made an officer.”

“Come,” said Monte Cristo, “this cross seems to me to be wisely
awarded. I suppose, had he found another additional vertebra, they
would have made him a commander.”

“Very likely,” said Albert.

“And who can that person be who has taken it into his head to wrap
himself up in a blue coat embroidered with green?”

“Oh, that coat is not his own idea; it is the Republic’s, which deputed
David12 to devise a uniform for the Academicians.”

“Indeed?” said Monte Cristo; “so this gentleman is an Academician?”

“Within the last week he has been made one of the learned assembly.”

“And what is his especial talent?”

“His talent? I believe he thrusts pins through the heads of rabbits, he
makes fowls eat madder, and punches the spinal marrow out of dogs with
whalebone.”

“And he is made a member of the Academy of Sciences for this?”

“No; of the French Academy.”

“But what has the French Academy to do with all this?”

“I was going to tell you. It seems——”

“That his experiments have very considerably advanced the cause of
science, doubtless?”

“No; that his style of writing is very good.”

“This must be very flattering to the feelings of the rabbits into whose
heads he has thrust pins, to the fowls whose bones he has dyed red, and
to the dogs whose spinal marrow he has punched out?”

Albert laughed.

“And the other one?” demanded the count.

“That one?”

“Yes, the third.”

“The one in the dark blue coat?”

“Yes.”

“He is a colleague of the count, and one of the most active opponents
to the idea of providing the Chamber of Peers with a uniform. He was
very successful upon that question. He stood badly with the Liberal
papers, but his noble opposition to the wishes of the court is now
getting him into favor with the journalists. They talk of making him an
ambassador.”

30303m



“And what are his claims to the peerage?”

“He has composed two or three comic operas, written four or five
articles in the _Siècle_, and voted five or six years on the
ministerial side.”

“Bravo, viscount,” said Monte Cristo, smiling; “you are a delightful
_cicerone_. And now you will do me a favor, will you not?”

“What is it?”

“Do not introduce me to any of these gentlemen; and should they wish
it, you will warn me.” Just then the count felt his arm pressed. He
turned round; it was Danglars.

“Ah! is it you, baron?” said he.

“Why do you call me baron?” said Danglars; “you know that I care
nothing for my title. I am not like you, viscount; you like your title,
do you not?”

“Certainly,” replied Albert, “seeing that without my title I should be
nothing; while you, sacrificing the baron, would still remain the
millionaire.”

“Which seems to me the finest title under the royalty of July,” replied
Danglars.

“Unfortunately,” said Monte Cristo, “one’s title to a millionaire do