e hours
he had passed in vain hopes, prayer, and despondency. During the six
years that he had been imprisoned, what might he not have accomplished?

This idea imparted new energy, and in three days he had succeeded, with
the utmost precaution, in removing the cement, and exposing the
stone-work. The wall was built of rough stones, among which, to give
strength to the structure, blocks of hewn stone were at intervals
imbedded. It was one of these he had uncovered, and which he must
remove from its socket.

Dantès strove to do this with his nails, but they were too weak. The
fragments of the jug broke, and after an hour of useless toil, Dantès
paused with anguish on his brow.

Was he to be thus stopped at the beginning, and was he to wait inactive
until his fellow workman had completed his task? Suddenly an idea
occurred to him—he smiled, and the perspiration dried on his forehead.

The jailer always brought Dantès’ soup in an iron saucepan; this
saucepan contained soup for both prisoners, for Dantès had noticed that
it was either quite full, or half empty, according as the turnkey gave
it to him or to his companion first.

The handle of this saucepan was of iron; Dantès would have given ten
years of his life in exchange for it.

0191m



The jailer was accustomed to pour the contents of the saucepan into
Dantès’ plate, and Dantès, after eating his soup with a wooden spoon,
washed the plate, which thus served for every day. Now when evening
came Dantès put his plate on the ground near the door; the jailer, as
he entered, stepped on it and broke it.

This time he could not blame Dantès. He was wrong to leave it there,
but the jailer was wrong not to have looked before him. The jailer,
therefore, only grumbled. Then he looked about for something to pour
the soup into; Dantès’ entire dinner service consisted of one
plate—there was no alternative.

“Leave the saucepan,” said Dantès; “you can take it away when you bring
me my breakfast.”

This advice was to the jailer’s taste, as it spared him the necessity
of making another trip. He left the saucepan.

Dantès was beside himself with joy. He rapidly devoured his food, and
after waiting an hour, lest the jailer should change his mind and
return, he removed his bed, took the handle of the saucepan, inserted
the point between the hewn stone and rough stones of the wall, and
employed it as a lever. A slight oscillation showed Dantès that all
went well. At the end of an hour the stone was extricated from the
wall, leaving a cavity a foot and a half in diameter.

Dantès carefully collected the plaster, carried it into the corner of
his cell, and covered it with earth. Then, wishing to make the best use
of his time while he had the means of labor, he continued to work
without ceasing. At the dawn of day he replaced the stone, pushed his
bed against the wall, and lay down. The breakfast consisted of a piece
of bread; the jailer entered and placed the bread on the table.

“Well, don’t you intend to bring me another plate?” said Dantès.

“No,” replied the turnkey; “you destroy everything. First you break
your jug, then you make me break your plate; if all the prisoners
followed your example, the government would be ruined. I shall leave
you the saucepan, and pour your soup into that. So for the future I
hope you will not be so destructive.”

Dantès raised his eyes to heaven and clasped his hands beneath the
coverlet. He felt more gratitude for the possession of this piece of
iron than he had ever felt for anything. He had noticed, however, that
the prisoner on the other side had ceased to labor; no matter, this was
a greater reason for proceeding—if his neighbor would not come to him,
he would go to his neighbor. All day he toiled on untiringly, and by
the evening he had succeeded in extracting ten handfuls of plaster and
fragments of stone. When the hour for his jailer’s visit arrived,
Dantès straightened the han