s coming to the point
he wished.

“Stay, I think I told my steward yesterday to attend to this; perhaps I
can render you this slight service also.”

He extended his hand, and rang the bell thrice.

“Did you ever occupy yourself,” said he to Franz, “with the employment
of time and the means of simplifying the summoning your servants? I
have. When I ring once, it is for my valet; twice, for my majordomo;
thrice, for my steward,—thus I do not waste a minute or a word. Here he
is.”

A man of about forty-five or fifty entered, exactly resembling the
smuggler who had introduced Franz into the cavern; but he did not
appear to recognize him. It was evident he had his orders.

“Monsieur Bertuccio,” said the count, “you have procured me windows
looking on the Piazza del Popolo, as I ordered you yesterday.”

“Yes, excellency,” returned the steward; “but it was very late.”

“Did I not tell you I wished for one?” replied the count, frowning.

“And your excellency has one, which was let to Prince Lobanieff; but I
was obliged to pay a hundred——”

“That will do—that will do, Monsieur Bertuccio; spare these gentlemen
all such domestic arrangements. You have the window, that is
sufficient. Give orders to the coachman; and be in readiness on the
stairs to conduct us to it.”

The steward bowed, and was about to quit the room.

“Ah!” continued the count, “be good enough to ask Pastrini if he has
received the _tavoletta_, and if he can send us an account of the
execution.”

“There is no need to do that,” said Franz, taking out his tablets; “for
I saw the account, and copied it down.”

“Very well, you can retire, M. Bertuccio; I need you no longer. Let us
know when breakfast is ready. These gentlemen,” added he, turning to
the two friends, “will, I trust, do me the honor to breakfast with me?”

“But, my dear count,” said Albert, “we shall abuse your kindness.”

“Not at all; on the contrary, you will give me great pleasure. You
will, one or other of you, perhaps both, return it to me at Paris. M.
Bertuccio, lay covers for three.”

He then took Franz’s tablets out of his hand. “‘We announce,’ he read,
in the same tone with which he would have read a newspaper, ‘that
today, the 23rd of February, will be executed Andrea Rondolo, guilty of
murder on the person of the respected and venerated Don César Torlini,
canon of the church of St. John Lateran, and Peppino, called Rocca
Priori, convicted of complicity with the detestable bandit Luigi Vampa,
and the men of his band.’

“Hum! ‘The first will be _mazzolato_, the second _decapitato_.’ Yes,”
continued the count, “it was at first arranged in this way; but I think
since yesterday some change has taken place in the order of the
ceremony.”

“Really?” said Franz.

“Yes, I passed the evening at the Cardinal Rospigliosi’s, and there
mention was made of something like a pardon for one of the two men.”

“For Andrea Rondolo?” asked Franz.

“No,” replied the count, carelessly; “for the other (he glanced at the
tablets as if to recall the name), for Peppino, called Rocca Priori.
You are thus deprived of seeing a man guillotined; but the _mazzolata_
still remains, which is a very curious punishment when seen for the
first time, and even the second, while the other, as you must know, is
very simple. The _mandaïa_6 never fails, never trembles, never strikes
thirty times ineffectually, like the soldier who beheaded the Count of
Chalais, and to whose tender mercy Richelieu had doubtless recommended
the sufferer. Ah,” added the count, in a contemptuous tone, “do not
tell me of European punishments, they are in the infancy, or rather the
old age, of cruelty.”

“Really, count,” replied Franz, “one would think that you had studied
the different tortures of all the nations of the world.”

“There are, at least, few that I have not seen,” said the count coldly.

“And you took pleasure in beholding these dreadful spectacles?”

“My first sen