ing the angle of the street and house, and,
seating himself thereon, began to smoke his chibouque, while Monte
Cristo re-entered his dwelling, perfectly assured of the success of his
plan.

Still, as five o’clock approached, and the carriage was momentarily
expected by the count, the indication of more than common impatience
and uneasiness might be observed in his manner. He stationed himself in
a room commanding a view of the street, pacing the chamber with
restless steps, stopping merely to listen from time to time for the
sound of approaching wheels, then to cast an anxious glance on Ali; but
the regularity with which the Nubian puffed forth the smoke of his
chibouque proved that he at least was wholly absorbed in the enjoyment
of his favorite occupation.

Suddenly a distant sound of rapidly advancing wheels was heard, and
almost immediately a carriage appeared, drawn by a pair of wild,
ungovernable horses, while the terrified coachman strove in vain to
restrain their furious speed.

In the vehicle was a young woman and a child of about seven or eight
clasped in each other’s arms. Terror seemed to have deprived them even
of the power of uttering a cry. The carriage creaked and rattled as it
flew over the rough stones, and the slightest obstacle under the wheels
would have caused disaster; but it kept on in the middle of the road,
and those who saw it pass uttered cries of terror.

Ali suddenly cast aside his chibouque, drew the lasso from his pocket,
threw it so skilfully as to catch the forelegs of the near horse in its
triple fold, and suffered himself to be dragged on for a few steps by
the violence of the shock, then the animal fell over on the pole, which
snapped, and therefore prevented the other horse from pursuing its way.
Gladly availing himself of this opportunity, the coachman leaped from
his box; but Ali had promptly seized the nostrils of the second horse,
and held them in his iron grasp, till the beast, snorting with pain,
sunk beside his companion.

All this was achieved in much less time than is occupied in the
recital. The brief space had, however, been sufficient for a man,
followed by a number of servants, to rush from the house before which
the accident had occurred, and, as the coachman opened the door of the
carriage, to take from it a lady who was convulsively grasping the
cushions with one hand, while with the other she pressed to her bosom
the young boy, who had lost consciousness. Monte Cristo carried them
both to the salon, and deposited them on a sofa.

“Compose yourself, madame,” said he; “all danger is over.” The woman
looked up at these words, and, with a glance far more expressive than
any entreaties could have been, pointed to her child, who still
continued insensible. “I understand the nature of your alarms, madame,”
said the count, carefully examining the child, “but I assure you there
is not the slightest occasion for uneasiness; your little charge has
not received the least injury; his insensibility is merely the effects
of terror, and will soon pass.”

“Are you quite sure you do not say so to tranquillize my fears? See how
deadly pale he is! My child, my darling Edward; speak to your
mother—open your dear eyes and look on me once again! Oh, sir, in pity
send for a physician; my whole fortune shall not be thought too much
for the recovery of my boy.”

With a calm smile and a gentle wave of the hand, Monte Cristo signed to
the distracted mother to lay aside her apprehensions; then, opening a
casket that stood near, he drew forth a phial of Bohemian glass
incrusted with gold, containing a liquid of the color of blood, of
which he let fall a single drop on the child’s lips. Scarcely had it
reached them, ere the boy, though still pale as marble, opened his
eyes, and eagerly gazed around him. At this, the delight of the mother
was almost frantic.

“Where am I?” exclaimed she; “and to whom am I indebted for so happy a
termi