earth, and I will soothe your ears with words that shall effectually
calm and soothe your parting soul ere it goes forth to traverse the
ocean called eternity.”

Bertuccio bowed respectfully, and turned away, sighing heavily. Monte
Cristo, left alone, took three or four steps onwards, and murmured:

“Here, beneath this plane-tree, must have been where the infant’s grave
was dug. There is the little door opening into the garden. At this
corner is the private staircase communicating with the sleeping
apartment. There will be no necessity for me to make a note of these
particulars, for there, before my eyes, beneath my feet, all around me,
I have the plan sketched with all the living reality of truth.”

After making the tour of the garden a second time, the count re-entered
his carriage, while Bertuccio, who perceived the thoughtful expression
of his master’s features, took his seat beside the driver without
uttering a word. The carriage proceeded rapidly towards Paris.

That same evening, upon reaching his abode in the Champs-Élysées, the
Count of Monte Cristo went over the whole building with the air of one
long acquainted with each nook or corner. Nor, although preceding the
party, did he once mistake one door for another, or commit the smallest
error when choosing any particular corridor or staircase to conduct him
to a place or suite of rooms he desired to visit. Ali was his principal
attendant during this nocturnal survey. Having given various orders to
Bertuccio relative to the improvements and alterations he desired to
make in the house, the Count, drawing out his watch, said to the
attentive Nubian:

“It is half-past eleven o’clock; Haydée will soon be here. Have the
French attendants been summoned to await her coming?”

Ali extended his hands towards the apartments destined for the fair
Greek, which were so effectually concealed by means of a tapestried
entrance, that it would have puzzled the most curious to have divined
their existence. Ali, having pointed to the apartments, held up three
fingers of his right hand, and then, placing it beneath his head, shut
his eyes, and feigned to sleep.

“I understand,” said Monte Cristo, well acquainted with Ali’s
pantomime; “you mean to tell me that three female attendants await
their new mistress in her sleeping-chamber.”

Ali, with considerable animation, made a sign in the affirmative.

“Madame will be tired tonight,” continued Monte Cristo, “and will, no
doubt, wish to rest. Desire the French attendants not to weary her with
questions, but merely to pay their respectful duty and retire. You will
also see that the Greek servants hold no communication with those of
this country.”

He bowed. Just at that moment voices were heard hailing the concierge.
The gate opened, a carriage rolled down the avenue, and stopped at the
steps. The count hastily descended, presented himself at the already
opened carriage door, and held out his hand to a young woman,
completely enveloped in a green silk mantle heavily embroidered with
gold. She raised the hand extended towards her to her lips, and kissed
it with a mixture of love and respect. Some few words passed between
them in that sonorous language in which Homer makes his gods converse.
The young woman spoke with an expression of deep tenderness, while the
count replied with an air of gentle gravity.

Preceded by Ali, who carried a rose-colored flambeau in his hand, the
young lady, who was no other than the lovely Greek who had been Monte
Cristo’s companion in Italy, was conducted to her apartments, while the
count retired to the pavilion reserved for himself. In another hour
every light in the house was extinguished, and it might have been
thought that all its inmates slept.



 Chapter 46. Unlimited Credit

About two o’clock the following day a calash, drawn by a pair of
magnificent English horses, stopped at the door of Monte Cristo and a
person, dressed in a blue