re, and I must first tell you that it was not the fault of your
servants that I did so; I alone am to blame for the indiscretion. I
went to your house, and they told me you were out, but that they
expected you home at ten o’clock to breakfast. I was walking about in
order to pass away the time till ten o’clock, when I caught sight of
your carriage and horses.”

“What you have just said induces me to hope that you intend
breakfasting with me.”

40092m



“No, thank you, I am thinking of other things besides breakfast just
now; perhaps we may take that meal at a later hour and in worse
company.”

“What on earth are you talking of?”

“I am to fight today.”

“For what?”

“For the sake of fighting!”

“Yes, I understand that, but what is the quarrel? People fight for all
sorts of reasons, you know.”

“I fight in the cause of honor.”

“Ah, that is something serious.”

“So serious, that I come to beg you to render me a service.”

“What is it?”

“To be my second.”

“That is a serious matter, and we will not discuss it here; let us
speak of nothing till we get home. Ali, bring me some water.”

The count turned up his sleeves, and passed into the little vestibule
where the gentlemen were accustomed to wash their hands after shooting.

“Come in, my lord,” said Philip in a low tone, “and I will show you
something droll.” Morcerf entered, and in place of the usual target, he
saw some playing-cards fixed against the wall. At a distance Albert
thought it was a complete suit, for he counted from the ace to the ten.

“Ah, ha,” said Albert, “I see you were preparing for a game of cards.”

“No,” said the count, “I was making a suit.”

“How?” said Albert.

“Those are really aces and twos which you see, but my shots have turned
them into threes, fives, sevens, eights, nines, and tens.”

Albert approached. In fact, the bullets had actually pierced the cards
in the exact places which the painted signs would otherwise have
occupied, the lines and distances being as regularly kept as if they
had been ruled with pencil. In going up to the target Morcerf picked up
two or three swallows that had been rash enough to come within the
range of the count’s pistol.

“_Diable!_” said Morcerf.

“What would you have, my dear viscount?” said Monte Cristo, wiping his
hands on the towel which Ali had brought him; “I must occupy my leisure
moments in some way or other. But come, I am waiting for you.”

Both men entered Monte Cristo’s carriage, which in the course of a few
minutes deposited them safely at No. 30. Monte Cristo took Albert into
his study, and pointing to a seat, placed another for himself. “Now let
us talk the matter over quietly,” said the count.

“You see I am perfectly composed,” said Albert.

“With whom are you going to fight?”

“With Beauchamp.”

“One of your friends!”

“Of course; it is always with friends that one fights.”

“I suppose you have some cause of quarrel?”

“I have.”

40094m



“What has he done to you?”

“There appeared in his journal last night—but wait, and read for
yourself.” And Albert handed over the paper to the count, who read as
follows:

“A correspondent at Yanina informs us of a fact of which until now we
had remained in ignorance. The castle which formed the protection of
the town was given up to the Turks by a French officer named Fernand,
in whom the grand vizier, Ali Tepelini, had reposed the greatest
confidence.”


“Well,” said Monte Cristo, “what do you see in that to annoy you?”

“What do I see in it?”

“Yes; what does it signify to you if the castle of Yanina was given up
by a French officer?”

“It signifies to my father, the Count of Morcerf, whose Christian name
is Fernand!”

“Did your father serve under Ali Pasha?”

“Yes; that is to say, he fought for the independence of the Greeks, and
hence arises the calumny.”

“Oh, my dear viscount, do talk reason!”

“I do not desire to do otherwise.”

