ather had lived.

The nasturtiums and other plants, which his father had delighted to
train before his window, had all disappeared from the upper part of the
house.

Leaning against the tree, he gazed thoughtfully for a time at the upper
stories of the shabby little house. Then he advanced to the door, and
asked whether there were any rooms to be let. Though answered in the
negative, he begged so earnestly to be permitted to visit those on the
fifth floor, that, in despite of the oft-repeated assurance of the
_concierge_ that they were occupied, Dantès succeeded in inducing the
man to go up to the tenants, and ask permission for a gentleman to be
allowed to look at them.

The tenants of the humble lodging were a young couple who had been
scarcely married a week; and seeing them, Dantès sighed heavily.
Nothing in the two small chambers forming the apartments remained as it
had been in the time of the elder Dantès; the very paper was different,
while the articles of antiquated furniture with which the rooms had
been filled in Edmond’s time had all disappeared; the four walls alone
remained as he had left them.

The bed belonging to the present occupants was placed as the former
owner of the chamber had been accustomed to have his; and, in spite of
his efforts to prevent it, the eyes of Edmond were suffused in tears as
he reflected that on that spot the old man had breathed his last,
vainly calling for his son.

The young couple gazed with astonishment at the sight of their
visitor’s emotion, and wondered to see the large tears silently chasing
each other down his otherwise stern and immovable features; but they
felt the sacredness of his grief, and kindly refrained from questioning
him as to its cause, while, with instinctive delicacy, they left him to
indulge his sorrow alone.

0317m



When he withdrew from the scene of his painful recollections, they both
accompanied him downstairs, reiterating their hope that he would come
again whenever he pleased, and assuring him that their poor dwelling
would ever be open to him.

As Edmond passed the door on the fourth floor, he paused to inquire
whether Caderousse the tailor still dwelt there; but he received for
reply, that the person in question had got into difficulties, and at
the present time kept a small inn on the route from Bellegarde to
Beaucaire.

Having obtained the address of the person to whom the house in the
Allées de Meilhan belonged, Dantès next proceeded thither, and, under
the name of Lord Wilmore (the name and title inscribed on his
passport), purchased the small dwelling for the sum of twenty-five
thousand francs, at least ten thousand more than it was worth; but had
its owner asked half a million, it would unhesitatingly have been
given.

The very same day the occupants of the apartments on the fifth floor of
the house, now become the property of Dantès, were duly informed by the
notary who had arranged the necessary transfer of deeds, etc., that the
new landlord gave them their choice of any of the rooms in the house,
without the least augmentation of rent, upon condition of their giving
instant possession of the two small chambers they at present inhabited.

This strange event aroused great wonder and curiosity in the
neighborhood of the Allées de Meilhan, and a multitude of theories were
afloat, none of which was anywhere near the truth. But what raised
public astonishment to a climax, and set all conjecture at defiance,
was the knowledge that the same stranger who had in the morning visited
the Allées de Meilhan had been seen in the evening walking in the
little village of the Catalans, and afterwards observed to enter a poor
fisherman’s hut, and to pass more than an hour in inquiring after
persons who had either been dead or gone away for more than fifteen or
sixteen years.

But on the following day the family from whom all these particulars had
been asked received a handsome presen