mmon,
every-day sort of attachment such as ours. But they are calling me. Do
you hear?”

“Ah, Valentine,” said Maximilian, “give me but one finger through this
opening in the grating, one finger, the littlest finger of all, that I
may have the happiness of kissing it.”

“Maximilian, we said we would be to each other as two voices, two
shadows.”

“As you will, Valentine.”

“Shall you be happy if I do what you wish?”

“Oh, yes!”

Valentine mounted on a bench, and passed not only her finger but her
whole hand through the opening. Maximilian uttered a cry of delight,
and, springing forwards, seized the hand extended towards him, and
imprinted on it a fervent and impassioned kiss. The little hand was
then immediately withdrawn, and the young man saw Valentine hurrying
towards the house, as though she were almost terrified at her own
sensations.



 Chapter 58. M. Noirtier de Villefort

We will now relate what was passing in the house of the king’s attorney
after the departure of Madame Danglars and her daughter, and during the
time of the conversation between Maximilian and Valentine, which we
have just detailed.

M. de Villefort entered his father’s room, followed by Madame de
Villefort. Both of the visitors, after saluting the old man and
speaking to Barrois, a faithful servant, who had been twenty-five years
in his service, took their places on either side of the paralytic.

M. Noirtier was sitting in an armchair, which moved upon casters, in
which he was wheeled into the room in the morning, and in the same way
drawn out again at night. He was placed before a large glass, which
reflected the whole apartment, and so, without any attempt to move,
which would have been impossible, he could see all who entered the room
and everything which was going on around him. M. Noirtier, although
almost as immovable as a corpse, looked at the new-comers with a quick
and intelligent expression, perceiving at once, by their ceremonious
courtesy, that they were come on business of an unexpected and official
character.

Sight and hearing were the only senses remaining, and they, like two
solitary sparks, remained to animate the miserable body which seemed
fit for nothing but the grave; it was only, however, by means of one of
these senses that he could reveal the thoughts and feelings that still
occupied his mind, and the look by which he gave expression to his
inner life was like the distant gleam of a candle which a traveller
sees by night across some desert place, and knows that a living being
dwells beyond the silence and obscurity.

Noirtier’s hair was long and white, and flowed over his shoulders;
while in his eyes, shaded by thick black lashes, was concentrated, as
it often happens with an organ which is used to the exclusion of the
others, all the activity, address, force, and intelligence which were
formerly diffused over his whole body; and so although the movement of
the arm, the sound of the voice, and the agility of the body, were
wanting, the speaking eye sufficed for all. He commanded with it; it
was the medium through which his thanks were conveyed. In short, his
whole appearance produced on the mind the impression of a corpse with
living eyes, and nothing could be more startling than to observe the
expression of anger or joy suddenly lighting up these organs, while the
rest of the rigid and marble-like features were utterly deprived of the
power of participation. Three persons only could understand this
language of the poor paralytic; these were Villefort, Valentine, and
the old servant of whom we have already spoken. But as Villefort saw
his father but seldom, and then only when absolutely obliged, and as he
never took any pains to please or gratify him when he was there, all
the old man’s happiness was centred in his granddaughter. Valentine, by
means of her love, her patience, and her devotion, had learned to read
in Noirtier’s look all the varied fe