rel’s warehouse, and had returned at
this date, would have found a great change. Instead of that air of
life, of comfort, and of happiness that permeates a flourishing and
prosperous business establishment—instead of merry faces at the
windows, busy clerks hurrying to and fro in the long corridors—instead
of the court filled with bales of goods, re-echoing with the cries and
the jokes of porters, one would have immediately perceived all aspect
of sadness and gloom. Out of all the numerous clerks that used to fill
the deserted corridor and the empty office, but two remained. One was a
young man of three or four-and-twenty, who was in love with M. Morrel’s
daughter, and had remained with him in spite of the efforts of his
friends to induce him to withdraw; the other was an old one-eyed
cashier, called “Cocles,” or “Cock-eye,” a nickname given him by the
young men who used to throng this vast now almost deserted bee-hive,
and which had so completely replaced his real name that he would not,
in all probability, have replied to anyone who addressed him by it.

Cocles remained in M. Morrel’s service, and a most singular change had
taken place in his position; he had at the same time risen to the rank
of cashier, and sunk to the rank of a servant. He was, however, the
same Cocles, good, patient, devoted, but inflexible on the subject of
arithmetic, the only point on which he would have stood firm against
the world, even against M. Morrel; and strong in the
multiplication-table, which he had at his fingers’ ends, no matter what
scheme or what trap was laid to catch him.

In the midst of the disasters that befell the house, Cocles was the
only one unmoved. But this did not arise from a want of affection; on
the contrary, from a firm conviction. Like the rats that one by one
forsake the doomed ship even before the vessel weighs anchor, so all
the numerous clerks had by degrees deserted the office and the
warehouse. Cocles had seen them go without thinking of inquiring the
cause of their departure. Everything was as we have said, a question of
arithmetic to Cocles, and during twenty years he had always seen all
payments made with such exactitude, that it seemed as impossible to him
that the house should stop payment, as it would to a miller that the
river that had so long turned his mill should cease to flow.

Nothing had as yet occurred to shake Cocles’ belief; the last month’s
payment had been made with the most scrupulous exactitude; Cocles had
detected an overbalance of fourteen sous in his cash, and the same
evening he had brought them to M. Morrel, who, with a melancholy smile,
threw them into an almost empty drawer, saying:

“Thanks, Cocles; you are the pearl of cashiers.”

Cocles went away perfectly happy, for this eulogium of M. Morrel,
himself the pearl of the honest men of Marseilles, flattered him more
than a present of fifty crowns. But since the end of the month M.
Morrel had passed many an anxious hour.

In order to meet the payments then due; he had collected all his
resources, and, fearing lest the report of his distress should get
bruited abroad at Marseilles when he was known to be reduced to such an
extremity, he went to the Beaucaire fair to sell his wife’s and
daughter’s jewels and a portion of his plate. By this means the end of
the month was passed, but his resources were now exhausted. Credit,
owing to the reports afloat, was no longer to be had; and to meet the
one hundred thousand francs due on the 15th of the present month, and
the one hundred thousand francs due on the 15th of the next month to M.
de Boville, M. Morrel had, in reality, no hope but the return of the
_Pharaon_, of whose departure he had learnt from a vessel which had
weighed anchor at the same time, and which had already arrived in
harbor.

But this vessel which, like the _Pharaon_, came from Calcutta, had been
in for a fortnight, while no intelligence had been received of the
_