ishevelled hair, he who had never felt compassion for anyone
determined to seek his father, that he might have someone to whom he
could relate his misfortunes,—someone by whose side he might weep.

50195m



He descended the little staircase with which we are acquainted, and
entered Noirtier’s room. The old man appeared to be listening
attentively and as affectionately as his infirmities would allow to the
Abbé Busoni, who looked cold and calm, as usual. Villefort, perceiving
the abbé, passed his hand across his brow. The past came to him like
one of those waves whose wrath foams fiercer than the others.

He recollected the call he had made upon him after the dinner at
Auteuil, and then the visit the abbé had himself paid to his house on
the day of Valentine’s death.

“You here, sir!” he exclaimed; “do you, then, never appear but to act
as an escort to death?”

Busoni turned around, and, perceiving the excitement depicted on the
magistrate’s face, the savage lustre of his eyes, he understood that
the revelation had been made at the assizes; but beyond this he was
ignorant.

“I came to pray over the body of your daughter.”

“And now why are you here?”

“I come to tell you that you have sufficiently repaid your debt, and
that from this moment I will pray to God to forgive you, as I do.”

“Good heavens!” exclaimed Villefort, stepping back fearfully, “surely
that is not the voice of the Abbé Busoni!”

“No!” The abbé threw off his wig, shook his head, and his hair, no
longer confined, fell in black masses around his manly face.

“It is the face of the Count of Monte Cristo!” exclaimed the procureur,
with a haggard expression.

“You are not exactly right, M. Procureur; you must go farther back.”

“That voice, that voice!—where did I first hear it?”

“You heard it for the first time at Marseilles, twenty-three years ago,
the day of your marriage with Mademoiselle de Saint-Méran. Refer to
your papers.”

“You are not Busoni?—you are not Monte Cristo? Oh, heavens! you are,
then, some secret, implacable, and mortal enemy! I must have wronged
you in some way at Marseilles. Oh, woe to me!”

“Yes; you are now on the right path,” said the count, crossing his arms
over his broad chest; “search—search!”

“But what have I done to you?” exclaimed Villefort, whose mind was
balancing between reason and insanity, in that cloud which is neither a
dream nor reality; “what have I done to you? Tell me, then! Speak!”

“You condemned me to a horrible, tedious death; you killed my father;
you deprived me of liberty, of love, and happiness.”

“Who are you, then? Who are you?”

“I am the spectre of a wretch you buried in the dungeons of the Château
d’If. God gave that spectre the form of the Count of Monte Cristo when
he at length issued from his tomb, enriched him with gold and diamonds,
and led him to you!”

“Ah, I recognize you—I recognize you!” exclaimed the king’s attorney;
“you are——”

“I am Edmond Dantès!”

“You are Edmond Dantès,” cried Villefort, seizing the count by the
wrist; “then come here!”

And up the stairs he dragged Monte Cristo; who, ignorant of what had
happened, followed him in astonishment, foreseeing some new
catastrophe.

“There, Edmond Dantès!” he said, pointing to the bodies of his wife and
child, “see, are you well avenged?”

Monte Cristo became pale at this horrible sight; he felt that he had
passed beyond the bounds of vengeance, and that he could no longer say,
“God is for and with me.” With an expression of indescribable anguish
he threw himself upon the body of the child, reopened its eyes, felt
its pulse, and then rushed with him into Valentine’s room, of which he
double-locked the door.

“My child,” cried Villefort, “he carries away the body of my child! Oh,
curses, woe, death to you!”

He tried to follow Monte Cristo; but as though in a dream he was
transfixed to the spot,—his eyes glared as though they were starting
through 