ove him, Kaa.”

“Ts! Ts!” said Kaa, weaving his head to and fro. “I also have known what
love is. There are tales I could tell that--”

“That need a clear night when we are all well fed to praise properly,”
 said Bagheera quickly. “Our man-cub is in the hands of the Bandar-log
now, and we know that of all the Jungle-People they fear Kaa alone.”

“They fear me alone. They have good reason,” said Kaa. “Chattering,
foolish, vain--vain, foolish, and chattering, are the monkeys. But a
man-thing in their hands is in no good luck. They grow tired of the nuts
they pick, and throw them down. They carry a branch half a day, meaning
to do great things with it, and then they snap it in two. That man-thing
is not to be envied. They called me also--`yellow fish’ was it not?”

“Worm--worm--earth-worm,” said Bagheera, “as well as other things which
I cannot now say for shame.”

“We must remind them to speak well of their master. Aaa-ssp! We must
help their wandering memories. Now, whither went they with the cub?”

“The jungle alone knows. Toward the sunset, I believe,” said Baloo. “We
had thought that thou wouldst know, Kaa.”

“I? How? I take them when they come in my way, but I do not hunt the
Bandar-log, or frogs--or green scum on a water-hole, for that matter.”

“Up, Up! Up, Up! Hillo! Illo! Illo, look up, Baloo of the Seeonee Wolf
Pack!”

Baloo looked up to see where the voice came from, and there was Rann the
Kite, sweeping down with the sun shining on the upturned flanges of his
wings. It was near Rann’s bedtime, but he had ranged all over the jungle
looking for the Bear and had missed him in the thick foliage.

“What is it?” said Baloo.

“I have seen Mowgli among the Bandar-log. He bade me tell you. I
watched. The Bandar-log have taken him beyond the river to the monkey
city--to the Cold Lairs. They may stay there for a night, or ten nights,
or an hour. I have told the bats to watch through the dark time. That is
my message. Good hunting, all you below!”

“Full gorge and a deep sleep to you, Rann,” cried Bagheera. “I will
remember thee in my next kill, and put aside the head for thee alone, O
best of kites!”

“It is nothing. It is nothing. The boy held the Master Word. I could
have done no less,” and Rann circled up again to his roost.

“He has not forgotten to use his tongue,” said Baloo with a chuckle of
pride. “To think of one so young remembering the Master Word for the
birds too while he was being pulled across trees!”

“It was most firmly driven into him,” said Bagheera. “But I am proud of
him, and now we must go to the Cold Lairs.”

They all knew where that place was, but few of the Jungle People ever
went there, because what they called the Cold Lairs was an old deserted
city, lost and buried in the jungle, and beasts seldom use a place that
men have once used. The wild boar will, but the hunting tribes do not.
Besides, the monkeys lived there as much as they could be said to live
anywhere, and no self-respecting animal would come within eyeshot of it
except in times of drought, when the half-ruined tanks and reservoirs
held a little water.

[Illustration: The “Cold Lairs”]

“It is half a night’s journey--at full speed,” said Bagheera, and Baloo
looked very serious. “I will go as fast as I can,” he said anxiously.

“We dare not wait for thee. Follow, Baloo. We must go on the
quick-foot--Kaa and I.”

“Feet or no feet, I can keep abreast of all thy four,” said Kaa shortly.
Baloo made one effort to hurry, but had to sit down panting, and so they
left him to come on later, while Bagheera hurried forward, at the quick
panther-canter. Kaa said nothing, but, strive as Bagheera might, the
huge Rock-python held level with him. When they came to a hill stream,
Bagheera gained, because he bounded across while Kaa swam, his head and
two feet of his neck clearing the water, but on level ground Kaa made up
the distance.

“By the Broken Lock that freed me,” sa