 years; and in the stables the
horses replied with neighs to the grooms, who spoke to them with much
more respect than many servants pay their masters.

The library was divided into two parts on either side of the wall, and
contained upwards of two thousand volumes; one division was entirely
devoted to novels, and even the volume which had been published but the
day before was to be seen in its place in all the dignity of its red
and gold binding.

On the other side of the house, to match with the library, was the
conservatory, ornamented with rare flowers, that bloomed in china jars;
and in the midst of the greenhouse, marvellous alike to sight and
smell, was a billiard-table which looked as if it had been abandoned
during the past hour by players who had left the balls on the cloth.

One chamber alone had been respected by the magnificent Bertuccio.
Before this room, to which you could ascend by the grand, and go out by
the back staircase, the servants passed with curiosity, and Bertuccio
with terror.

At five o’clock precisely, the count arrived before the house at
Auteuil, followed by Ali. Bertuccio was awaiting this arrival with
impatience, mingled with uneasiness; he hoped for some compliments,
while, at the same time, he feared to have frowns. Monte Cristo
descended into the courtyard, walked all over the house, without giving
any sign of approbation or pleasure, until he entered his bedroom,
situated on the opposite side to the closed room; then he approached a
little piece of furniture, made of rosewood, which he had noticed at a
previous visit.

“That can only be to hold gloves,” he said.

“Will your excellency deign to open it?” said the delighted Bertuccio,
“and you will find gloves in it.”

Elsewhere the count found everything he required—smelling-bottles,
cigars, knick-knacks.

30207m



“Good,” he said; and M. Bertuccio left enraptured, so great, so
powerful, and real was the influence exercised by this man over all who
surrounded him.

At precisely six o’clock the clatter of horses’ hoofs was heard at the
entrance door; it was our captain of Spahis, who had arrived on Médéah.
“I am sure I am the first,” cried Morrel; “I did it on purpose to have
you a minute to myself, before everyone came. Julie and Emmanuel have a
thousand things to tell you. Ah, really this is magnificent! But tell
me, count, will your people take care of my horse?”

“Do not alarm yourself, my dear Maximilian—they understand.”

“I mean, because he wants petting. If you had seen at what a pace he
came—like the wind!”

“I should think so,—a horse that cost 5,000 francs!” said Monte Cristo,
in the tone which a father would use towards a son.

“Do you regret them?” asked Morrel, with his open laugh.

“I? Certainly not,” replied the count. “No; I should only regret if the
horse had not proved good.”

“It is so good, that I have distanced M. de Château-Renaud, one of the
best riders in France, and M. Debray, who both mount the minister’s
Arabians; and close on their heels are the horses of Madame Danglars,
who always go at six leagues an hour.”

“Then they follow you?” asked Monte Cristo.

“See, they are here.” And at the same minute a carriage with smoking
horses, accompanied by two mounted gentlemen, arrived at the gate,
which opened before them. The carriage drove round, and stopped at the
steps, followed by the horsemen.

The instant Debray had touched the ground, he was at the carriage-door.
He offered his hand to the baroness, who, descending, took it with a
peculiarity of manner imperceptible to everyone but Monte Cristo. But
nothing escaped the count’s notice, and he observed a little note,
passed with the facility that indicates frequent practice, from the
hand of Madame Danglars to that of the minister’s secretary.

After his wife the banker descended, as pale as though he had issued
from his tomb instead of his carriage.

Madame Danglars threw a rap