to tell her that her grandfather
was suffering, and that there was much on his mind which he was wishing
to communicate to her.

“Dear grandpapa,” cried she, “what has happened? They have vexed you,
and you are angry?”

The paralytic closed his eyes in token of assent.

“Who has displeased you? Is it my father?”

“No.”

“Madame de Villefort?”

“No.”

“Me?” The former sign was repeated.

“Are you displeased with me?” cried Valentine in astonishment. M.
Noirtier again closed his eyes.

“And what have I done, dear grandpapa, that you should be angry with
me?” cried Valentine.

There was no answer, and she continued:

“I have not seen you all day. Has anyone been speaking to you against
me?”

“Yes,” said the old man’s look, with eagerness.

“Let me think a moment. I do assure you, grandpapa—Ah—M. and Madame de
Villefort have just left this room, have they not?”

“Yes.”

“And it was they who told you something which made you angry? What was
it then? May I go and ask them, that I may have the opportunity of
making my peace with you?”

“No, no,” said Noirtier’s look.

“Ah, you frighten me. What can they have said?” and she again tried to
think what it could be.

“Ah, I know,” said she, lowering her voice and going close to the old
man. “They have been speaking of my marriage,—have they not?”

“Yes,” replied the angry look.

“I understand; you are displeased at the silence I have preserved on
the subject. The reason of it was, that they had insisted on my keeping
the matter a secret, and begged me not to tell you anything of it. They
did not even acquaint me with their intentions, and I only discovered
them by chance, that is why I have been so reserved with you, dear
grandpapa. Pray forgive me.”

But there was no look calculated to reassure her; all it seemed to say
was, “It is not only your reserve which afflicts me.”

“What is it, then?” asked the young girl. “Perhaps you think I shall
abandon you, dear grandpapa, and that I shall forget you when I am
married?”

“No.”

“They told you, then, that M. d’Épinay consented to our all living
together?”

“Yes.”

“Then why are you still vexed and grieved?” The old man’s eyes beamed
with an expression of gentle affection.

“Yes, I understand,” said Valentine; “it is because you love me.” The
old man assented.

“And you are afraid I shall be unhappy?”

“Yes.”

“You do not like M. Franz?” The eyes repeated several times, “No, no,
no.”

“Then you are vexed with the engagement?”

“Yes.”

“Well, listen,” said Valentine, throwing herself on her knees, and
putting her arm round her grandfather’s neck, “I am vexed, too, for I
do not love M. Franz d’Épinay.”

An expression of intense joy illumined the old man’s eyes.

“When I wished to retire into a convent, you remember how angry you
were with me?” A tear trembled in the eye of the invalid. “Well,”
continued Valentine, “the reason of my proposing it was that I might
escape this hateful marriage, which drives me to despair.” Noirtier’s
breathing came thick and short.

“Then the idea of this marriage really grieves you too? Ah, if you
could but help me—if we could both together defeat their plan! But you
are unable to oppose them,—you, whose mind is so quick, and whose will
is so firm are nevertheless, as weak and unequal to the contest as I am
myself. Alas, you, who would have been such a powerful protector to me
in the days of your health and strength, can now only sympathize in my
joys and sorrows, without being able to take any active part in them.
However, this is much, and calls for gratitude and Heaven has not taken
away all my blessings when it leaves me your sympathy and kindness.”

At these words there appeared in Noirtier’s eye an expression of such
deep meaning that the young girl thought she could read these words
there: “You are mistaken; I can still do much for you.”

“Do you think you can help me, dear grandpapa?” said Val