 one wishes to be a prig or a Puritan, one can flaunt one’s moral
views about them, but they are not one’s concern. Besides,
individualism has really the higher aim. Modern morality consists in
accepting the standard of one’s age. I consider that for any man of
culture to accept the standard of his age is a form of the grossest
immorality.”

“But, surely, if one lives merely for one’s self, Harry, one pays a
terrible price for doing so?” suggested the painter.

“Yes, we are overcharged for everything nowadays. I should fancy that
the real tragedy of the poor is that they can afford nothing but
self-denial. Beautiful sins, like beautiful things, are the privilege
of the rich.”

“One has to pay in other ways but money.”

“What sort of ways, Basil?”

“Oh! I should fancy in remorse, in suffering, in ... well, in the
consciousness of degradation.”

Lord Henry shrugged his shoulders. “My dear fellow, mediæval art is
charming, but mediæval emotions are out of date. One can use them in
fiction, of course. But then the only things that one can use in
fiction are the things that one has ceased to use in fact. Believe me,
no civilized man ever regrets a pleasure, and no uncivilized man ever
knows what a pleasure is.”

“I know what pleasure is,” cried Dorian Gray. “It is to adore some
one.”

“That is certainly better than being adored,” he answered, toying with
some fruits. “Being adored is a nuisance. Women treat us just as
humanity treats its gods. They worship us, and are always bothering us
to do something for them.”

“I should have said that whatever they ask for they had first given to
us,” murmured the lad gravely. “They create love in our natures. They
have a right to demand it back.”

“That is quite true, Dorian,” cried Hallward.

“Nothing is ever quite true,” said Lord Henry.

“This is,” interrupted Dorian. “You must admit, Harry, that women give
to men the very gold of their lives.”

“Possibly,” he sighed, “but they invariably want it back in such very
small change. That is the worry. Women, as some witty Frenchman once
put it, inspire us with the desire to do masterpieces and always
prevent us from carrying them out.”

“Harry, you are dreadful! I don’t know why I like you so much.”

“You will always like me, Dorian,” he replied. “Will you have some
coffee, you fellows? Waiter, bring coffee, and _fine-champagne_, and
some cigarettes. No, don’t mind the cigarettes—I have some. Basil, I
can’t allow you to smoke cigars. You must have a cigarette. A cigarette
is the perfect type of a perfect pleasure. It is exquisite, and it
leaves one unsatisfied. What more can one want? Yes, Dorian, you will
always be fond of me. I represent to you all the sins you have never
had the courage to commit.”

“What nonsense you talk, Harry!” cried the lad, taking a light from a
fire-breathing silver dragon that the waiter had placed on the table.
“Let us go down to the theatre. When Sibyl comes on the stage you will
have a new ideal of life. She will represent something to you that you
have never known.”

“I have known everything,” said Lord Henry, with a tired look in his
eyes, “but I am always ready for a new emotion. I am afraid, however,
that, for me at any rate, there is no such thing. Still, your wonderful
girl may thrill me. I love acting. It is so much more real than life.
Let us go. Dorian, you will come with me. I am so sorry, Basil, but
there is only room for two in the brougham. You must follow us in a
hansom.”

They got up and put on their coats, sipping their coffee standing. The
painter was silent and preoccupied. There was a gloom over him. He
could not bear this marriage, and yet it seemed to him to be better
than many other things that might have happened. After a few minutes,
they all passed downstairs. He drove off by himself, as had been
arranged, and watched the flashing lights of the little brougham in
front of him. A strange sense of loss came o