 wife.”

“Do you think so?”

“I am sure of it.”

“And you have heard his fortune mentioned?”

“Nothing else was talked of; only some said he was worth millions, and
others that he did not possess a farthing.”

“And what is your opinion?”

“I ought not to influence you, because it is only my own personal
impression.”

“Well, and it is that——”

“My opinion is, that all these old _podestàs_, these ancient
_condottieri_,—for the Cavalcanti have commanded armies and governed
provinces,—my opinion, I say, is, that they have buried their millions
in corners, the secret of which they have transmitted only to their
eldest sons, who have done the same from generation to generation; and
the proof of this is seen in their yellow and dry appearance, like the
florins of the republic, which, from being constantly gazed upon, have
become reflected in them.”

“Certainly,” said Danglars, “and this is further supported by the fact
of their not possessing an inch of land.”

“Very little, at least; I know of none which Cavalcanti possesses,
excepting his palace in Lucca.”

“Ah, he has a palace?” said Danglars, laughing; “come, that is
something.”

“Yes; and more than that, he lets it to the Minister of Finance while
he lives in a simple house. Oh, as I told you before, I think the old
fellow is very close.”

“Come, you do not flatter him.”

“I scarcely know him; I think I have seen him three times in my life;
all I know relating to him is through Busoni and himself. He was
telling me this morning that, tired of letting his property lie dormant
in Italy, which is a dead nation, he wished to find a method, either in
France or England, of multiplying his millions, but remember, that
though I place great confidence in Busoni, I am not responsible for
this.”

“Never mind; accept my thanks for the client you have sent me. It is a
fine name to inscribe on my ledgers, and my cashier was quite proud of
it when I explained to him who the Cavalcanti were. By the way, this is
merely a simple question, when this sort of people marry their sons, do
they give them any fortune?”

“Oh, that depends upon circumstances. I know an Italian prince, rich as
a gold mine, one of the noblest families in Tuscany, who, when his sons
married according to his wish, gave them millions; and when they
married against his consent, merely allowed them thirty crowns a month.
Should Andrea marry according to his father’s views, he will, perhaps,
give him one, two, or three millions. For example, supposing it were
the daughter of a banker, he might take an interest in the house of the
father-in-law of his son; then again, if he disliked his choice, the
major takes the key, double-locks his coffer, and Master Andrea would
be obliged to live like the sons of a Parisian family, by shuffling
cards or rattling the dice.”

“Ah, that boy will find out some Bavarian or Peruvian princess; he will
want a crown, an El Dorado, and Potosí.”

“No; these grand lords on the other side of the Alps frequently marry
into plain families; like Jupiter, they like to cross the race. But do
you wish to marry Andrea, my dear M. Danglars, that you are asking so
many questions?”

“_Ma foi_,” said Danglars, “it would not be a bad speculation, I fancy,
and you know I am a speculator.”

“You are not thinking of Mademoiselle Danglars, I hope; you would not
like poor Andrea to have his throat cut by Albert?”

“Albert,” repeated Danglars, shrugging his shoulders; “ah, well; he
would care very little about it, I think.”

“But he is betrothed to your daughter, I believe?”

“Well, M. de Morcerf and I have talked about this marriage, but Madame
de Morcerf and Albert——”

“You do not mean to say that it would not be a good match?”

“Indeed, I imagine that Mademoiselle Danglars is as good as M. de
Morcerf.”

“Mademoiselle Danglars’ fortune will be great, no doubt, especially if
the telegraph should not make any more mistakes.”
