; but this was not the case. The Spadas remained in
doubtful ease, a mystery hung over this dark affair, and the public
rumor was, that Cæsar, a better politician than his father, had carried
off from the pope the fortune of the two cardinals. I say the two,
because Cardinal Rospigliosi, who had not taken any precaution, was
completely despoiled.

“Up to this point,” said Faria, interrupting the thread of his
narrative, “this seems to you very meaningless, no doubt, eh?”

“Oh, my friend,” cried Dantès, “on the contrary, it seems as if I were
reading a most interesting narrative; go on, I beg of you.”

“I will. The family began to get accustomed to their obscurity. Years
rolled on, and amongst the descendants some were soldiers, others
diplomatists; some churchmen, some bankers; some grew rich, and some
were ruined. I come now to the last of the family, whose secretary I
was—the Count of Spada. I had often heard him complain of the
disproportion of his rank with his fortune; and I advised him to invest
all he had in an annuity. He did so, and thus doubled his income. The
celebrated breviary remained in the family, and was in the count’s
possession. It had been handed down from father to son; for the
singular clause of the only will that had been found, had caused it to
be regarded as a genuine relic, preserved in the family with
superstitious veneration. It was an illuminated book, with beautiful
Gothic characters, and so weighty with gold, that a servant always
carried it before the cardinal on days of great solemnity.

“At the sight of papers of all sorts,—titles, contracts, parchments,
which were kept in the archives of the family, all descending from the
poisoned cardinal, I in my turn examined the immense bundles of
documents, like twenty servitors, stewards, secretaries before me; but
in spite of the most exhaustive researches, I found—nothing. Yet I had
read, I had even written a precise history of the Borgia family, for
the sole purpose of assuring myself whether any increase of fortune had
occurred to them on the death of the Cardinal Cæsar Spada; but could
only trace the acquisition of the property of the Cardinal Rospigliosi,
his companion in misfortune.

“I was then almost assured that the inheritance had neither profited
the Borgias nor the family, but had remained unpossessed like the
treasures of the Arabian Nights, which slept in the bosom of the earth
under the eyes of the genie. I searched, ransacked, counted, calculated
a thousand and a thousand times the income and expenditure of the
family for three hundred years. It was useless. I remained in my
ignorance, and the Count of Spada in his poverty.

“My patron died. He had reserved from his annuity his family papers,
his library, composed of five thousand volumes, and his famous
breviary. All these he bequeathed to me, with a thousand Roman crowns,
which he had in ready money, on condition that I would have anniversary
masses said for the repose of his soul, and that I would draw up a
genealogical tree and history of his house. All this I did
scrupulously. Be easy, my dear Edmond, we are near the conclusion.

“In 1807, a month before I was arrested, and a fortnight after the
death of the Count of Spada, on the 25th of December (you will see
presently how the date became fixed in my memory), I was reading, for
the thousandth time, the papers I was arranging, for the palace was
sold to a stranger, and I was going to leave Rome and settle at
Florence, intending to take with me twelve thousand francs I possessed,
my library, and the famous breviary, when, tired with my constant labor
at the same thing, and overcome by a heavy dinner I had eaten, my head
dropped on my hands, and I fell asleep about three o’clock in the
afternoon.

0243m



“I awoke as the clock was striking six. I raised my head; I was in
utter darkness. I rang for a light, but, as no one came, I determined
to find one for myse