inded him it was time to dress for
dinner. He got up and looked out into the street. The sunset had
smitten into scarlet gold the upper windows of the houses opposite. The
panes glowed like plates of heated metal. The sky above was like a
faded rose. He thought of his friend’s young fiery-coloured life and
wondered how it was all going to end.

When he arrived home, about half-past twelve o’clock, he saw a telegram
lying on the hall table. He opened it and found it was from Dorian
Gray. It was to tell him that he was engaged to be married to Sibyl
Vane.




CHAPTER V.


“Mother, Mother, I am so happy!” whispered the girl, burying her face
in the lap of the faded, tired-looking woman who, with back turned to
the shrill intrusive light, was sitting in the one arm-chair that their
dingy sitting-room contained. “I am so happy!” she repeated, “and you
must be happy, too!”

Mrs. Vane winced and put her thin, bismuth-whitened hands on her
daughter’s head. “Happy!” she echoed, “I am only happy, Sibyl, when I
see you act. You must not think of anything but your acting. Mr. Isaacs
has been very good to us, and we owe him money.”

The girl looked up and pouted. “Money, Mother?” she cried, “what does
money matter? Love is more than money.”

“Mr. Isaacs has advanced us fifty pounds to pay off our debts and to
get a proper outfit for James. You must not forget that, Sibyl. Fifty
pounds is a very large sum. Mr. Isaacs has been most considerate.”

“He is not a gentleman, Mother, and I hate the way he talks to me,”
said the girl, rising to her feet and going over to the window.

“I don’t know how we could manage without him,” answered the elder
woman querulously.

Sibyl Vane tossed her head and laughed. “We don’t want him any more,
Mother. Prince Charming rules life for us now.” Then she paused. A rose
shook in her blood and shadowed her cheeks. Quick breath parted the
petals of her lips. They trembled. Some southern wind of passion swept
over her and stirred the dainty folds of her dress. “I love him,” she
said simply.

“Foolish child! foolish child!” was the parrot-phrase flung in answer.
The waving of crooked, false-jewelled fingers gave grotesqueness to the
words.

The girl laughed again. The joy of a caged bird was in her voice. Her
eyes caught the melody and echoed it in radiance, then closed for a
moment, as though to hide their secret. When they opened, the mist of a
dream had passed across them.

Thin-lipped wisdom spoke at her from the worn chair, hinted at
prudence, quoted from that book of cowardice whose author apes the name
of common sense. She did not listen. She was free in her prison of
passion. Her prince, Prince Charming, was with her. She had called on
memory to remake him. She had sent her soul to search for him, and it
had brought him back. His kiss burned again upon her mouth. Her eyelids
were warm with his breath.

Then wisdom altered its method and spoke of espial and discovery. This
young man might be rich. If so, marriage should be thought of. Against
the shell of her ear broke the waves of worldly cunning. The arrows of
craft shot by her. She saw the thin lips moving, and smiled.

Suddenly she felt the need to speak. The wordy silence troubled her.
“Mother, Mother,” she cried, “why does he love me so much? I know why I
love him. I love him because he is like what love himself should be.
But what does he see in me? I am not worthy of him. And yet—why, I
cannot tell—though I feel so much beneath him, I don’t feel humble. I
feel proud, terribly proud. Mother, did you love my father as I love
Prince Charming?”

The elder woman grew pale beneath the coarse powder that daubed her
cheeks, and her dry lips twitched with a spasm of pain. Sybil rushed to
her, flung her arms round her neck, and kissed her. “Forgive me,
Mother. I know it pains you to talk about our father. But it only pains
you because you loved him so much. Don’t look so sad. I 