nce would be
followed by a fiery outburst. ‘Well,’ asked the president, ‘what is
your decision?’

40206m



“‘I have no reply to make,’ said the count in a low tone.

“‘Has the daughter of Ali Tepelini spoken the truth?’ said the
president. ‘Is she, then, the terrible witness to whose charge you dare
not plead “Not guilty”? Have you really committed the crimes of which
you are accused?’ The count looked around him with an expression which
might have softened tigers, but which could not disarm his judges. Then
he raised his eyes towards the ceiling, but withdrew then, immediately,
as if he feared the roof would open and reveal to his distressed view
that second tribunal called heaven, and that other judge named God.
Then, with a hasty movement, he tore open his coat, which seemed to
stifle him, and flew from the room like a madman; his footstep was
heard one moment in the corridor, then the rattling of his
carriage-wheels as he was driven rapidly away. ‘Gentlemen,’ said the
president, when silence was restored, ‘is the Count of Morcerf
convicted of felony, treason, and conduct unbecoming a member of this
House?’—‘Yes,’ replied all the members of the committee of inquiry with
a unanimous voice.

“Haydée had remained until the close of the meeting. She heard the
count’s sentence pronounced without betraying an expression of joy or
pity; then drawing her veil over her face she bowed majestically to the
councillors, and left with that dignified step which Virgil attributes
to his goddesses.”



 Chapter 87. The Challenge

Then,” continued Beauchamp, “I took advantage of the silence and the
darkness to leave the house without being seen. The usher who had
introduced me was waiting for me at the door, and he conducted me
through the corridors to a private entrance opening into the Rue de
Vaugirard. I left with mingled feelings of sorrow and delight. Excuse
me, Albert,—sorrow on your account, and delight with that noble girl,
thus pursuing paternal vengeance. Yes, Albert, from whatever source the
blow may have proceeded—it may be from an enemy, but that enemy is only
the agent of Providence.”

Albert held his head between his hands; he raised his face, red with
shame and bathed in tears, and seizing Beauchamp’s arm:

“My friend,” said he, “my life is ended. I cannot calmly say with you,
‘Providence has struck the blow;’ but I must discover who pursues me
with this hatred, and when I have found him I shall kill him, or he
will kill me. I rely on your friendship to assist me, Beauchamp, if
contempt has not banished it from your heart.”

“Contempt, my friend? How does this misfortune affect you? No, happily
that unjust prejudice is forgotten which made the son responsible for
the father’s actions. Review your life, Albert; although it is only
just beginning, did a lovely summer’s day ever dawn with greater purity
than has marked the commencement of your career? No, Albert, take my
advice. You are young and rich—leave Paris—all is soon forgotten in
this great Babylon of excitement and changing tastes. You will return
after three or four years with a Russian princess for a bride, and no
one will think more of what occurred yesterday than if it had happened
sixteen years ago.”

“Thank you, my dear Beauchamp, thank you for the excellent feeling
which prompts your advice; but it cannot be. I have told you my wish,
or rather my determination. You understand that, interested as I am in
this affair, I cannot see it in the same light as you do. What appears
to you to emanate from a celestial source, seems to me to proceed from
one far less pure. Providence appears to me to have no share in this
affair; and happily so, for instead of the invisible, impalpable agent
of celestial rewards and punishments, I shall find one both palpable
and visible, on whom I shall revenge myself, I assure you, for all I
have suffered during the last month. Now, I repeat, Beauchamp, I wish
to