p.

“And to think that I had an idea of marrying his daughter,” said
Debray. “She did well to die, poor girl!”

“The sitting is adjourned, gentlemen,” said the president; “fresh
inquiries will be made, and the case will be tried next session by
another magistrate.”

As for Andrea, who was calm and more interesting than ever, he left the
hall, escorted by gendarmes, who involuntarily paid him some attention.

“Well, what do you think of this, my fine fellow?” asked Debray of the
sergeant-at-arms, slipping a louis into his hand.

“There will be extenuating circumstances,” he replied.



 Chapter 111. Expiation

Notwithstanding the density of the crowd, M. de Villefort saw it open
before him. There is something so awe-inspiring in great afflictions
that even in the worst times the first emotion of a crowd has generally
been to sympathize with the sufferer in a great catastrophe. Many
people have been assassinated in a tumult, but even criminals have
rarely been insulted during trial. Thus Villefort passed through the
mass of spectators and officers of the Palais, and withdrew. Though he
had acknowledged his guilt, he was protected by his grief. There are
some situations which men understand by instinct, but which reason is
powerless to explain; in such cases the greatest poet is he who gives
utterance to the most natural and vehement outburst of sorrow. Those
who hear the bitter cry are as much impressed as if they listened to an
entire poem, and when the sufferer is sincere they are right in
regarding his outburst as sublime.

It would be difficult to describe the state of stupor in which
Villefort left the Palais. Every pulse beat with feverish excitement,
every nerve was strained, every vein swollen, and every part of his
body seemed to suffer distinctly from the rest, thus multiplying his
agony a thousand-fold. He made his way along the corridors through
force of habit; he threw aside his magisterial robe, not out of
deference to etiquette, but because it was an unbearable burden, a
veritable garb of Nessus, insatiate in torture. Having staggered as far
as the Rue Dauphine, he perceived his carriage, awoke his sleeping
coachman by opening the door himself, threw himself on the cushions,
and pointed towards the Faubourg Saint-Honoré; the carriage drove on.

All the weight of his fallen fortune seemed suddenly to crush him; he
could not foresee the consequences; he could not contemplate the future
with the indifference of the hardened criminal who merely faces a
contingency already familiar.



God was still in his heart. “God,” he murmured, not knowing what he
said,—“God—God!” Behind the event that had overwhelmed him he saw the
hand of God. The carriage rolled rapidly onward. Villefort, while
turning restlessly on the cushions, felt something press against him.
He put out his hand to remove the object; it was a fan which Madame de
Villefort had left in the carriage; this fan awakened a recollection
which darted through his mind like lightning. He thought of his wife.

50189m



“Oh!” he exclaimed, as though a red-hot iron were piercing his heart.

During the last hour his own crime had alone been presented to his
mind; now another object, not less terrible, suddenly presented itself.
His wife! He had just acted the inexorable judge with her, he had
condemned her to death, and she, crushed by remorse, struck with
terror, covered with the shame inspired by the eloquence of _his_
irreproachable virtue,—she, a poor, weak woman, without help or the
power of defending herself against his absolute and supreme will,—she
might at that very moment, perhaps, be preparing to die!

An hour had elapsed since her condemnation; at that moment, doubtless,
she was recalling all her crimes to her memory; she was asking pardon
for her sins; perhaps she was even writing a letter imploring
forgiveness from her virtuous husband—a forgiveness she was purchasing
with he