us horsewhip the fine gentleman!” said others.

But Andrea, turning towards them, winked his eyes, rolled his tongue
around his cheeks, and smacked his lips in a manner equivalent to a
hundred words among the bandits when forced to be silent. It was a
Masonic sign Caderousse had taught him. He was immediately recognized
as one of them; the handkerchief was thrown down, and the iron-heeled
shoe replaced on the foot of the wretch to whom it belonged.

Some voices were heard to say that the gentleman was right; that he
intended to be civil, in his way, and that they would set the example
of liberty of conscience,—and the mob retired. The keeper was so
stupefied at this scene that he took Andrea by the hands and began
examining his person, attributing the sudden submission of the inmates
of the Lions’ Den to something more substantial than mere fascination.

Andrea made no resistance, although he protested against it. Suddenly a
voice was heard at the wicket.

“Benedetto!” exclaimed an inspector. The keeper relaxed his hold.

“I am called,” said Andrea.

“To the visitors’ room!” said the same voice.

“You see someone pays me a visit. Ah, my dear sir, you will see whether
a Cavalcanti is to be treated like a common person!”

And Andrea, gliding through the court like a black shadow, rushed out
through the wicket, leaving his comrades, and even the keeper, lost in
wonder. Certainly a call to the visitors’ room had scarcely astonished
Andrea less than themselves, for the wily youth, instead of making use
of his privilege of waiting to be claimed on his entry into La Force,
had maintained a rigid silence.

50153m



“Everything,” he said, “proves me to be under the protection of some
powerful person,—this sudden fortune, the facility with which I have
overcome all obstacles, an unexpected family and an illustrious name
awarded to me, gold showered down upon me, and the most splendid
alliances about to be entered into. An unhappy lapse of fortune and the
absence of my protector have cast me down, certainly, but not forever.
The hand which has retreated for a while will be again stretched forth
to save me at the very moment when I shall think myself sinking into
the abyss. Why should I risk an imprudent step? It might alienate my
protector. He has two means of extricating me from this dilemma,—the
one by a mysterious escape, managed through bribery; the other by
buying off my judges with gold. I will say and do nothing until I am
convinced that he has quite abandoned me, and then——”

Andrea had formed a plan which was tolerably clever. The unfortunate
youth was intrepid in the attack, and rude in the defence. He had borne
with the public prison, and with privations of all sorts; still, by
degrees nature, or rather custom, had prevailed, and he suffered from
being naked, dirty, and hungry. It was at this moment of discomfort
that the inspector’s voice called him to the visiting-room. Andrea felt
his heart leap with joy. It was too soon for a visit from the examining
magistrate, and too late for one from the director of the prison, or
the doctor; it must, then, be the visitor he hoped for. Behind the
grating of the room into which Andrea had been led, he saw, while his
eyes dilated with surprise, the dark and intelligent face of M.
Bertuccio, who was also gazing with sad astonishment upon the iron
bars, the bolted doors, and the shadow which moved behind the other
grating.

“Ah,” said Andrea, deeply affected.

“Good morning, Benedetto,” said Bertuccio, with his deep, hollow voice.

“You—you?” said the young man, looking fearfully around him.

“Do you not recognize me, unhappy child?”

“Silence,—be silent!” said Andrea, who knew the delicate sense of
hearing possessed by the walls; “for Heaven’s sake, do not speak so
loud!”

“You wish to speak with me alone, do you not?” said Bertuccio.

“Oh, yes.”

“That is well.”

And Bertuccio, feeling in his pocket, s