 obtained
that the two funerals should take place at the same time. A second
hearse, decked with the same funereal pomp, was brought to M. de
Villefort’s door, and the coffin removed into it from the post-wagon.
The two bodies were to be interred in the cemetery of Père-Lachaise,
where M. de Villefort had long since had a tomb prepared for the
reception of his family. The remains of poor Renée were already
deposited there, and now, after ten years of separation, her father and
mother were to be reunited with her.

The Parisians, always curious, always affected by funereal display,
looked on with religious silence while the splendid procession
accompanied to their last abode two of the number of the old
aristocracy—the greatest protectors of commerce and sincere devotees to
their principles.

In one of the mourning-coaches Beauchamp, Debray, and Château-Renaud
were talking of the very sudden death of the marchioness.

“I saw Madame de Saint-Méran only last year at Marseilles, when I was
coming back from Algiers,” said Château-Renaud; “she looked like a
woman destined to live to be a hundred years old, from her apparent
sound health and great activity of mind and body. How old was she?”

“Franz assured me,” replied Albert, “that she was sixty-six years old.
But she has not died of old age, but of grief; it appears that since
the death of the marquis, which affected her very deeply, she has not
completely recovered her reason.”

“But of what disease, then, did she die?” asked Debray.

“It is said to have been a congestion of the brain, or apoplexy, which
is the same thing, is it not?”

“Nearly.”

“It is difficult to believe that it was apoplexy,” said Beauchamp.
“Madame de Saint-Méran, whom I once saw, was short, of slender form,
and of a much more nervous than sanguine temperament; grief could
hardly produce apoplexy in such a constitution as that of Madame de
Saint-Méran.”

“At any rate,” said Albert, “whatever disease or doctor may have killed
her, M. de Villefort, or rather, Mademoiselle Valentine,—or, still
rather, our friend Franz, inherits a magnificent fortune, amounting, I
believe, to 80,000 livres per annum.”

“And this fortune will be doubled at the death of the old Jacobin,
Noirtier.”

“That is a tenacious old grandfather,” said Beauchamp. “_Tenacem
propositi virum_. I think he must have made an agreement with death to
outlive all his heirs, and he appears likely to succeed. He resembles
the old Conventionalist of ’93, who said to Napoleon, in 1814, ‘You
bend because your empire is a young stem, weakened by rapid growth.
Take the Republic for a tutor; let us return with renewed strength to
the battle-field, and I promise you 500,000 soldiers, another Marengo,
and a second Austerlitz. Ideas do not become extinct, sire; they
slumber sometimes, but only revive the stronger before they sleep
entirely.’”

“Ideas and men appeared the same to him,” said Albert. “One thing only
puzzles me, namely, how Franz d’Épinay will like a grandfather who
cannot be separated from his wife. But where is Franz?”

“In the first carriage, with M. de Villefort, who considers him already
as one of the family.”

40024m



Such was the conversation in almost all the carriages; these two sudden
deaths, so quickly following each other, astonished everyone, but no
one suspected the terrible secret which M. d’Avrigny had communicated,
in his nocturnal walk to M. de Villefort. They arrived in about an hour
at the cemetery; the weather was mild, but dull, and in harmony with
the funeral ceremony. Among the groups which flocked towards the family
vault, Château-Renaud recognized Morrel, who had come alone in a
cabriolet, and walked silently along the path bordered with yew-trees.

“You here?” said Château-Renaud, passing his arms through the young
captain’s; “are you a friend of Villefort’s? How is it that I have
never met you at his house?”

“I am no acquaintance of M