ad, to quarrel
with him if it became necessary to quarrel, to part if parting was
inevitable. He jumped up, drew the screen hastily across the picture,
and unlocked the door.

“I am so sorry for it all, Dorian,” said Lord Henry as he entered. “But
you must not think too much about it.”

“Do you mean about Sibyl Vane?” asked the lad.

“Yes, of course,” answered Lord Henry, sinking into a chair and slowly
pulling off his yellow gloves. “It is dreadful, from one point of view,
but it was not your fault. Tell me, did you go behind and see her,
after the play was over?”

“Yes.”

“I felt sure you had. Did you make a scene with her?”

“I was brutal, Harry—perfectly brutal. But it is all right now. I am
not sorry for anything that has happened. It has taught me to know
myself better.”

“Ah, Dorian, I am so glad you take it in that way! I was afraid I would
find you plunged in remorse and tearing that nice curly hair of yours.”

“I have got through all that,” said Dorian, shaking his head and
smiling. “I am perfectly happy now. I know what conscience is, to begin
with. It is not what you told me it was. It is the divinest thing in
us. Don’t sneer at it, Harry, any more—at least not before me. I want
to be good. I can’t bear the idea of my soul being hideous.”

“A very charming artistic basis for ethics, Dorian! I congratulate you
on it. But how are you going to begin?”

“By marrying Sibyl Vane.”

“Marrying Sibyl Vane!” cried Lord Henry, standing up and looking at him
in perplexed amazement. “But, my dear Dorian—”

“Yes, Harry, I know what you are going to say. Something dreadful about
marriage. Don’t say it. Don’t ever say things of that kind to me again.
Two days ago I asked Sibyl to marry me. I am not going to break my word
to her. She is to be my wife.”

“Your wife! Dorian! ... Didn’t you get my letter? I wrote to you this
morning, and sent the note down by my own man.”

“Your letter? Oh, yes, I remember. I have not read it yet, Harry. I was
afraid there might be something in it that I wouldn’t like. You cut
life to pieces with your epigrams.”

“You know nothing then?”

“What do you mean?”

Lord Henry walked across the room, and sitting down by Dorian Gray,
took both his hands in his own and held them tightly. “Dorian,” he
said, “my letter—don’t be frightened—was to tell you that Sibyl Vane is
dead.”

A cry of pain broke from the lad’s lips, and he leaped to his feet,
tearing his hands away from Lord Henry’s grasp. “Dead! Sibyl dead! It
is not true! It is a horrible lie! How dare you say it?”

“It is quite true, Dorian,” said Lord Henry, gravely. “It is in all the
morning papers. I wrote down to you to ask you not to see any one till
I came. There will have to be an inquest, of course, and you must not
be mixed up in it. Things like that make a man fashionable in Paris.
But in London people are so prejudiced. Here, one should never make
one’s _début_ with a scandal. One should reserve that to give an
interest to one’s old age. I suppose they don’t know your name at the
theatre? If they don’t, it is all right. Did any one see you going
round to her room? That is an important point.”

Dorian did not answer for a few moments. He was dazed with horror.
Finally he stammered, in a stifled voice, “Harry, did you say an
inquest? What did you mean by that? Did Sibyl—? Oh, Harry, I can’t bear
it! But be quick. Tell me everything at once.”

“I have no doubt it was not an accident, Dorian, though it must be put
in that way to the public. It seems that as she was leaving the theatre
with her mother, about half-past twelve or so, she said she had
forgotten something upstairs. They waited some time for her, but she
did not come down again. They ultimately found her lying dead on the
floor of her dressing-room. She had swallowed something by mistake,
some dreadful thing they use at theatres. I don’t know what it was, but
it had either prussic acid or white lead i