outh is not blighted, or suffered to pass away in ungenial
solitude; and of this be well assured, that if you love me as a father,
I love you as a child.”

“You are wrong, my lord. The love I have for you is very different from
the love I had for my father. My father died, but I did not die. If you
were to die, I should die too.”

The count, with a smile of profound tenderness, extended his hand, and
she carried it to her lips.

Monte Cristo, thus attuned to the interview he proposed to hold with
Morrel and his family, departed, murmuring as he went these lines of
Pindar, “Youth is a flower of which love is the fruit; happy is he who,
after having watched its silent growth, is permitted to gather and call
it his own.” The carriage was prepared according to orders, and
stepping lightly into it, the count drove off at his usual rapid pace.



 Chapter 50. The Morrel Family

In a very few minutes the count reached No. 7 in the Rue Meslay. The
house was of white stone, and in a small court before it were two small
beds full of beautiful flowers. In the concierge that opened the gate
the count recognized Cocles; but as he had but one eye, and that eye
had become somewhat dim in the course of nine years, Cocles did not
recognize the count.

The carriages that drove up to the door were compelled to turn, to
avoid a fountain that played in a basin of rockwork,—an ornament that
had excited the jealousy of the whole quarter, and had gained for the
place the appellation of _The Little Versailles_. It is needless to add
that there were gold and silver fish in the basin. The house, with
kitchens and cellars below, had above the ground floor, two stories and
attics. The whole of the property, consisting of an immense workshop,
two pavilions at the bottom of the garden, and the garden itself, had
been purchased by Emmanuel, who had seen at a glance that he could make
of it a profitable speculation. He had reserved the house and half the
garden, and building a wall between the garden and the workshops, had
let them upon lease with the pavilions at the bottom of the garden. So
that for a trifling sum he was as well lodged, and as perfectly shut
out from observation, as the inhabitants of the finest mansion in the
Faubourg St. Germain.

The breakfast-room was finished in oak; the salon in mahogany, and the
furnishings were of blue velvet; the bedroom was in citronwood and
green damask. There was a study for Emmanuel, who never studied, and a
music-room for Julie, who never played. The whole of the second story
was set apart for Maximilian; it was precisely similar to his sister’s
apartments, except that for the breakfast-parlor he had a
billiard-room, where he received his friends. He was superintending the
grooming of his horse, and smoking his cigar at the entrance of the
garden, when the count’s carriage stopped at the gate.

Cocles opened the gate, and Baptistin, springing from the box, inquired
whether Monsieur and Madame Herbault and Monsieur Maximilian Morrel
would see his excellency the Count of Monte Cristo.

“The Count of Monte Cristo?” cried Morrel, throwing away his cigar and
hastening to the carriage; “I should think we would see him. Ah, a
thousand thanks, count, for not having forgotten your promise.”

And the young officer shook the count’s hand so warmly, that Monte
Cristo could not be mistaken as to the sincerity of his joy, and he saw
that he had been expected with impatience, and was received with
pleasure.

“Come, come,” said Maximilian, “I will serve as your guide; such a man
as you are ought not to be introduced by a servant. My sister is in the
garden plucking the dead roses; my brother is reading his two papers,
_la Presse_ and _les Débats_, within six steps of her; for wherever you
see Madame Herbault, you have only to look within a circle of four
yards and you will find M. Emmanuel, and ‘reciprocally,’ as they say at
the Polytechnic School.”

