ment’s reflection, ‘Yes, go, Florentin,’ said she, ‘and
may he come quickly.’”

“Yes, my mother,” said Albert, “I will return, and woe to the infamous
wretch! But first of all I must get there.”

He went back to the room where he had left Monte Cristo. Five minutes
had sufficed to make a complete transformation in his appearance. His
voice had become rough and hoarse; his face was furrowed with wrinkles;
his eyes burned under the blue-veined lids, and he tottered like a
drunken man.

“Count,” said he, “I thank you for your hospitality, which I would
gladly have enjoyed longer; but I must return to Paris.”

“What has happened?”

“A great misfortune, more important to me than life. Don’t question me,
I beg of you, but lend me a horse.”

“My stables are at your command, viscount; but you will kill yourself
by riding on horseback. Take a post-chaise or a carriage.”

“No, it would delay me, and I need the fatigue you warn me of; it will
do me good.”

Albert reeled as if he had been shot, and fell on a chair near the
door. Monte Cristo did not see this second manifestation of physical
exhaustion; he was at the window, calling:

“Ali, a horse for M. de Morcerf—quick! he is in a hurry!”

40190m



These words restored Albert; he darted from the room, followed by the
count.

“Thank you!” cried he, throwing himself on his horse.

“Return as soon as you can, Florentin. Must I use any password to
procure a horse?”

“Only dismount; another will be immediately saddled.”

Albert hesitated a moment. “You may think my departure strange and
foolish,” said the young man; “you do not know how a paragraph in a
newspaper may exasperate one. Read that,” said he, “when I am gone,
that you may not be witness of my anger.”

While the count picked up the paper he put spurs to his horse, which
leaped in astonishment at such an unusual stimulus, and shot away with
the rapidity of an arrow. The count watched him with a feeling of
compassion, and when he had completely disappeared, read as follows:

“The French officer in the service of Ali Pasha of Yanina alluded to
three weeks since in _l’Impartial_, who not only surrendered the castle
of Yanina, but sold his benefactor to the Turks, styled himself truly
at that time Fernand, as our esteemed contemporary states; but he has
since added to his Christian name a title of nobility and a family
name. He now calls himself the Count of Morcerf, and ranks among the
peers.”

Thus the terrible secret, which Beauchamp had so generously destroyed,
appeared again like an armed phantom; and another paper, deriving its
information from some malicious source, had published two days after
Albert’s departure for Normandy the few lines which had rendered the
unfortunate young man almost crazy.



 Chapter 86. The Trial

At eight o’clock in the morning Albert had arrived at Beauchamp’s door.
The valet de chambre had received orders to usher him in at once.
Beauchamp was in his bath.

“Here I am,” Albert said.

“Well, my poor friend,” replied Beauchamp, “I expected you.”

“I need not say I think you are too faithful and too kind to have
spoken of that painful circumstance. Your having sent for me is another
proof of your affection. So, without losing time, tell me, have you the
slightest idea whence this terrible blow proceeds?”

“I think I have some clew.”

“But first tell me all the particulars of this shameful plot.”

Beauchamp proceeded to relate to the young man, who was overwhelmed
with shame and grief, the following facts. Two days previously, the
article had appeared in another paper besides _ l’Impartial_, and, what
was more serious, one that was well known as a government paper.
Beauchamp was breakfasting when he read the paragraph. He sent
immediately for a cabriolet, and hastened to the publisher’s office.
Although professing diametrically opposite principles from those of the
editor of the other paper, Beauchamp—as it