w, and it spoke an unknown tongue. One of
its chiefs, who understood Provençal, begged the commune of Marseilles
to give them this bare and barren promontory, where, like the sailors
of old, they had run their boats ashore. The request was granted; and
three months afterwards, around the twelve or fifteen small vessels
which had brought these gypsies of the sea, a small village sprang up.
This village, constructed in a singular and picturesque manner, half
Moorish, half Spanish, still remains, and is inhabited by descendants
of the first comers, who speak the language of their fathers. For three
or four centuries they have remained upon this small promontory, on
which they had settled like a flight of seabirds, without mixing with
the Marseillaise population, intermarrying, and preserving their
original customs and the costume of their mother-country as they have
preserved its language.

Our readers will follow us along the only street of this little
village, and enter with us one of the houses, which is sunburned to the
beautiful dead-leaf color peculiar to the buildings of the country, and
within coated with whitewash, like a Spanish posada. A young and
beautiful girl, with hair as black as jet, her eyes as velvety as the
gazelle’s, was leaning with her back against the wainscot, rubbing in
her slender delicately moulded fingers a bunch of heath blossoms, the
flowers of which she was picking off and strewing on the floor; her
arms, bare to the elbow, brown, and modelled after those of the
Arlesian Venus, moved with a kind of restless impatience, and she
tapped the earth with her arched and supple foot, so as to display the
pure and full shape of her well-turned leg, in its red cotton, gray and
blue clocked, stocking. At three paces from her, seated in a chair
which he balanced on two legs, leaning his elbow on an old worm-eaten
table, was a tall young man of twenty, or two-and-twenty, who was
looking at her with an air in which vexation and uneasiness were
mingled. He questioned her with his eyes, but the firm and steady gaze
of the young girl controlled his look.

“You see, Mercédès,” said the young man, “here is Easter come round
again; tell me, is this the moment for a wedding?”

“I have answered you a hundred times, Fernand, and really you must be
very stupid to ask me again.”

“Well, repeat it,—repeat it, I beg of you, that I may at last believe
it! Tell me for the hundredth time that you refuse my love, which had
your mother’s sanction. Make me understand once for all that you are
trifling with my happiness, that my life or death are nothing to you.
Ah, to have dreamed for ten years of being your husband, Mercédès, and
to lose that hope, which was the only stay of my existence!”

“At least it was not I who ever encouraged you in that hope, Fernand,”
replied Mercédès; “you cannot reproach me with the slightest coquetry.
I have always said to you, ‘I love you as a brother; but do not ask
from me more than sisterly affection, for my heart is another’s.’ Is
not this true, Fernand?”

“Yes, that is very true, Mercédès,” replied the young man, “Yes, you
have been cruelly frank with me; but do you forget that it is among the
Catalans a sacred law to intermarry?”

0045m



“You mistake, Fernand; it is not a law, but merely a custom, and, I
pray of you, do not cite this custom in your favor. You are included in
the conscription, Fernand, and are only at liberty on sufferance,
liable at any moment to be called upon to take up arms. Once a soldier,
what would you do with me, a poor orphan, forlorn, without fortune,
with nothing but a half-ruined hut and a few ragged nets, the miserable
inheritance left by my father to my mother, and by my mother to me? She
has been dead a year, and you know, Fernand, I have subsisted almost
entirely on public charity. Sometimes you pretend I am useful to you,
and that is an excuse to share with me the produce of your fishing, an