 coat, with buttons of a similar color, a
white waistcoat, over which was displayed a massive gold chain, brown
trousers, and a quantity of black hair descending so low over his
eyebrows as to leave it doubtful whether it were not artificial so
little did its jetty glossiness assimilate with the deep wrinkles
stamped on his features—a person, in a word, who, although evidently
past fifty, desired to be taken for not more than forty, bent forwards
from the carriage door, on the panels of which were emblazoned the
armorial bearings of a baron, and directed his groom to inquire at the
porter’s lodge whether the Count of Monte Cristo resided there, and if
he were within.

While waiting, the occupant of the carriage surveyed the house, the
garden as far as he could distinguish it, and the livery of servants
who passed to and fro, with an attention so close as to be somewhat
impertinent. His glance was keen but showed cunning rather than
intelligence; his lips were straight, and so thin that, as they closed,
they were drawn in over the teeth; his cheek-bones were broad and
projecting, a never-failing proof of audacity and craftiness; while the
flatness of his forehead, and the enlargement of the back of his skull,
which rose much higher than his large and coarsely shaped ears,
combined to form a physiognomy anything but prepossessing, save in the
eyes of such as considered that the owner of so splendid an equipage
must needs be all that was admirable and enviable, more especially when
they gazed on the enormous diamond that glittered in his shirt, and the
red ribbon that depended from his button-hole.

The groom, in obedience to his orders, tapped at the window of the
porter’s lodge, saying:

“Pray, does not the Count of Monte Cristo live here?”

“His excellency does reside here,” replied the concierge; “but——” added
he, glancing an inquiring look at Ali. Ali returned a sign in the
negative.

“But what?” asked the groom.

“His excellency does not receive visitors today.”

“Then here is my master’s card, the Baron Danglars. You will take it to
the count, and say that, although in haste to attend the Chamber, my
master came out of his way to have the honor of calling upon him.”

“I never speak to his excellency,” replied the concierge; “the valet de
chambre will carry your message.”

The groom returned to the carriage.

“Well?” asked Danglars.

The man, somewhat crest-fallen by the rebuke he had received, repeated
what the concierge had said.

“Bless me,” murmured Baron Danglars, “this must surely be a prince
instead of a count by their styling him ‘excellency,’ and only
venturing to address him by the medium of his valet de chambre.
However, it does not signify; he has a letter of credit on me, so I
must see him when he requires his money.”

Then, throwing himself back in his carriage, Danglars called out to his
coachman, in a voice that might be heard across the road, “To the
Chamber of Deputies.”

Apprised in time of the visit paid him, Monte Cristo had, from behind
the blinds of his pavilion, as minutely observed the baron, by means of
an excellent lorgnette, as Danglars himself had scrutinized the house,
garden, and servants.

“That fellow has a decidedly bad countenance,” said the count in a tone
of disgust, as he shut up his glass into its ivory case. “How comes it
that all do not retreat in aversion at sight of that flat, receding,
serpent-like forehead, round, vulture-shaped head, and sharp-hooked
nose, like the beak of a buzzard? Ali,” cried he, striking at the same
time on the brazen gong. Ali appeared. “Summon Bertuccio,” said the
count. Almost immediately Bertuccio entered the apartment.

“Did your excellency desire to see me?” inquired he.

“I did,” replied the count. “You no doubt observed the horses standing
a few minutes since at the door?”

“Certainly, your excellency. I noticed them for their remarkable
beauty.”

“Then how comes it,