could articulate nothing; he
staggered, and supported himself against the wainscot. Then he pointed
to the door.

“Yes, yes, yes!” continued the old man.

50089m



Maximilian rushed up the little staircase, while Noirtier’s eyes seemed
to say,—“Quicker, quicker!”

In a minute the young man darted through several rooms, till at length
he reached Valentine’s.

There was no occasion to push the door, it was wide open. A sob was the
only sound he heard. He saw as though in a mist, a black figure
kneeling and buried in a confused mass of white drapery. A terrible
fear transfixed him. It was then he heard a voice exclaim “Valentine is
dead!” and another voice which, like an echo repeated:

“Dead,—dead!”

50090m




 Chapter 103. Maximilian

Villefort rose, half-ashamed of being surprised in such a paroxysm of
grief. The terrible office he had held for twenty-five years had
succeeded in making him more or less than man. His glance, at first
wandering, fixed itself upon Morrel. “Who are you, sir,” he asked,
“that forget that this is not the manner to enter a house stricken with
death? Go, sir, go!”

But Morrel remained motionless; he could not detach his eyes from that
disordered bed, and the pale corpse of the young girl who was lying on
it.

“Go!—do you hear?” said Villefort, while d’Avrigny advanced to lead
Morrel out. Maximilian stared for a moment at the corpse, gazed all
around the room, then upon the two men; he opened his mouth to speak,
but finding it impossible to give utterance to the innumerable ideas
that occupied his brain, he went out, thrusting his hands through his
hair in such a manner that Villefort and d’Avrigny, for a moment
diverted from the engrossing topic, exchanged glances, which seemed to
say,—“He is mad!”

But in less than five minutes the staircase groaned beneath an
extraordinary weight. Morrel was seen carrying, with superhuman
strength, the armchair containing Noirtier upstairs. When he reached
the landing he placed the armchair on the floor and rapidly rolled it
into Valentine’s room. This could only have been accomplished by means
of unnatural strength supplied by powerful excitement. But the most
fearful spectacle was Noirtier being pushed towards the bed, his face
expressing all his meaning, and his eyes supplying the want of every
other faculty. That pale face and flaming glance appeared to Villefort
like a frightful apparition. Each time he had been brought into contact
with his father, something terrible had happened.

“See what they have done!” cried Morrel, with one hand leaning on the
back of the chair, and the other extended towards Valentine. “See, my
father, see!”

Villefort drew back and looked with astonishment on the young man, who,
almost a stranger to him, called Noirtier his father. At this moment
the whole soul of the old man seemed centred in his eyes which became
bloodshot; the veins of the throat swelled; his cheeks and temples
became purple, as though he was struck with epilepsy; nothing was
wanting to complete this but the utterance of a cry. And the cry issued
from his pores, if we may thus speak—a cry frightful in its silence.
D’Avrigny rushed towards the old man and made him inhale a powerful
restorative.

“Sir,” cried Morrel, seizing the moist hand of the paralytic, “they ask
me who I am, and what right I have to be here. Oh, you know it, tell
them, tell them!” And the young man’s voice was choked by sobs.

As for the old man, his chest heaved with his panting respiration. One
could have thought that he was undergoing the agonies preceding death.
At length, happier than the young man, who sobbed without weeping,
tears glistened in the eyes of Noirtier.

“Tell them,” said Morrel in a hoarse voice, “tell them that I am her
betrothed. Tell them she was my beloved, my noble girl, my only
blessing in the world. Tell them—oh, tell them, that corpse belongs to
me!”

The young man overwhelmed