mself by a final effort, in which he summoned all his
faculties, he said,—“Monte Cristo, forget not Monte Cristo!” And he
fell back on the bed.

The crisis was terrible, and a rigid form with twisted limbs, swollen
eyelids, and lips flecked with bloody foam, lay on the bed of torture,
in place of the intellectual being who so lately rested there.

Dantès took the lamp, placed it on a projecting stone above the bed,
whence its tremulous light fell with strange and fantastic ray on the
distorted countenance and motionless, stiffened body. With steady gaze
he awaited confidently the moment for administering the restorative.

When he believed that the right moment had arrived, he took the knife,
pried open the teeth, which offered less resistance than before,
counted one after the other twelve drops, and watched; the phial
contained, perhaps, twice as much more. He waited ten minutes, a
quarter of an hour, half an hour,—no change took place. Trembling, his
hair erect, his brow bathed with perspiration, he counted the seconds
by the beating of his heart. Then he thought it was time to make the
last trial, and he put the phial to the purple lips of Faria, and
without having occasion to force open his jaws, which had remained
extended, he poured the whole of the liquid down his throat.

0255m



The draught produced a galvanic effect, a violent trembling pervaded
the old man’s limbs, his eyes opened until it was fearful to gaze upon
them, he heaved a sigh which resembled a shriek, and then his convulsed
body returned gradually to its former immobility, the eyes remaining
open.

Half an hour, an hour, an hour and a half elapsed, and during this
period of anguish, Edmond leaned over his friend, his hand applied to
his heart, and felt the body gradually grow cold, and the heart’s
pulsation become more and more deep and dull, until at length it
stopped; the last movement of the heart ceased, the face became livid,
the eyes remained open, but the eyeballs were glazed.

It was six o’clock in the morning, the dawn was just breaking, and its
feeble ray came into the dungeon, and paled the ineffectual light of
the lamp. Strange shadows passed over the countenance of the dead man,
and at times gave it the appearance of life. While the struggle between
day and night lasted, Dantès still doubted; but as soon as the daylight
gained the pre-eminence, he saw that he was alone with a corpse. Then
an invincible and extreme terror seized upon him, and he dared not
again press the hand that hung out of bed, he dared no longer to gaze
on those fixed and vacant eyes, which he tried many times to close, but
in vain—they opened again as soon as shut. He extinguished the lamp,
carefully concealed it, and then went away, closing as well as he could
the entrance to the secret passage by the large stone as he descended.

It was time, for the jailer was coming. On this occasion he began his
rounds at Dantès’ cell, and on leaving him he went on to Faria’s
dungeon, taking thither breakfast and some linen. Nothing betokened
that the man knew anything of what had occurred. He went on his way.

Dantès was then seized with an indescribable desire to know what was
going on in the dungeon of his unfortunate friend. He therefore
returned by the subterraneous gallery, and arrived in time to hear the
exclamations of the turnkey, who called out for help. Other turnkeys
came, and then was heard the regular tramp of soldiers. Last of all
came the governor.

Edmond heard the creaking of the bed as they moved the corpse, heard
the voice of the governor, who asked them to throw water on the dead
man’s face; and seeing that, in spite of this application, the prisoner
did not recover, they sent for the doctor. The governor then went out,
and words of pity fell on Dantès’ listening ears, mingled with brutal
laughter.

“Well, well,” said one, “the madman has gone to look after his
treasure. Good journey to hi