master.

“In the name of heaven, madame,” said Villefort, “where is the doctor?
He was with you just now. You see this is a fit of apoplexy, and he
might be saved if he could but be bled!”

“Has he eaten anything lately?” asked Madame de Villefort, eluding her
husband’s question.

“Madame,” replied Valentine, “he has not even breakfasted. He has been
running very fast on an errand with which my grandfather charged him,
and when he returned, took nothing but a glass of lemonade.”

“Ah,” said Madame de Villefort, “why did he not take wine? Lemonade was
a very bad thing for him.”

“Grandpapa’s bottle of lemonade was standing just by his side; poor
Barrois was very thirsty, and was thankful to drink anything he could
find.”

Madame de Villefort started. Noirtier looked at her with a glance of
the most profound scrutiny.

“He has such a short neck,” said she.

“Madame,” said Villefort, “I ask where is M. d’Avrigny? In God’s name
answer me!”

“He is with Edward, who is not quite well,” replied Madame de
Villefort, no longer being able to avoid answering.

Villefort rushed upstairs to fetch him.

“Take this,” said Madame de Villefort, giving her smelling-bottle to
Valentine. “They will, no doubt, bleed him; therefore I will retire,
for I cannot endure the sight of blood;” and she followed her husband
upstairs. Morrel now emerged from his hiding-place, where he had
remained quite unperceived, so great had been the general confusion.

“Go away as quick as you can, Maximilian,” said Valentine, “and stay
till I send for you. Go.”

Morrel looked towards Noirtier for permission to retire. The old man,
who had preserved all his usual coolness, made a sign to him to do so.
The young man pressed Valentine’s hand to his lips, and then left the
house by a back staircase.

At the same moment that he quitted the room, Villefort and the doctor
entered by an opposite door. Barrois was now showing signs of returning
consciousness. The crisis seemed past, a low moaning was heard, and he
raised himself on one knee. D’Avrigny and Villefort laid him on a
couch.

“What do you prescribe, doctor?” demanded Villefort.

“Give me some water and ether. You have some in the house, have you
not?”

“Yes.”

“Send for some oil of turpentine and tartar emetic.”

Villefort immediately despatched a messenger. “And now let everyone
retire.”

“Must I go too?” asked Valentine timidly.

“Yes, mademoiselle, you especially,” replied the doctor abruptly.

Valentine looked at M. d’Avrigny with astonishment, kissed her
grandfather on the forehead, and left the room. The doctor closed the
door after her with a gloomy air.

“Look, look, doctor,” said Villefort, “he is quite coming round again;
I really do not think, after all, it is anything of consequence.”

M. d’Avrigny answered by a melancholy smile.

“How do you feel, Barrois?” asked he.

“A little better, sir.”

“Will you drink some of this ether and water?”

“I will try; but don’t touch me.”

“Why not?”

“Because I feel that if you were only to touch me with the tip of your
finger the fit would return.”

“Drink.”

Barrois took the glass, and, raising it to his purple lips, took about
half of the liquid offered him.

“Where do you suffer?” asked the doctor.

“Everywhere. I feel cramps over my whole body.”

“Do you find any dazzling sensation before the eyes?”

“Yes.”

“Any noise in the ears?”

“Frightful.”

40112m



“When did you first feel that?”

“Just now.”

“Suddenly?”

“Yes, like a clap of thunder.”

“Did you feel nothing of it yesterday or the day before?”

“Nothing.”

“No drowsiness?”

“None.”

“What have you eaten today?”

“I have eaten nothing; I only drank a glass of my master’s
lemonade—that’s all.” And Barrois turned towards Noirtier, who,
immovably fixed in his armchair, was contemplating this terrible scene
without allowing a word or a movement to escape him.

“Where is this l