, and then returned to the charge.
At the third he fell again. They thought he slipped, as at first, and
the witnesses, seeing he did not move, approached and endeavored to
raise him, but the one who passed his arm around the body found it was
moistened with blood. The general, who had almost fainted, revived.
“Ah,” said he, “they have sent some fencing-master to fight with me.”
The president, without answering, approached the witness who held the
lantern, and raising his sleeve, showed him two wounds he had received
in his arm; then opening his coat, and unbuttoning his waistcoat,
displayed his side, pierced with a third wound. Still he had not even
uttered a sigh. General d’Épinay died five minutes after.’”

Franz read these last words in a voice so choked that they were hardly
audible, and then stopped, passing his hand over his eyes as if to
dispel a cloud; but after a moment’s silence, he continued:

“‘The president went up the steps, after pushing his sword into his
cane; a track of blood on the snow marked his course. He had scarcely
arrived at the top when he heard a heavy splash in the water—it was the
general’s body, which the witnesses had just thrown into the river
after ascertaining that he was dead. The general fell, then, in a loyal
duel, and not in ambush as it might have been reported. In proof of
this we have signed this paper to establish the truth of the facts,
lest the moment should arrive when either of the actors in this
terrible scene should be accused of premeditated murder or of
infringement of the laws of honor.

“‘Signed, Beaurepaire, Duchampy, and Lecharpal.’”

When Franz had finished reading this account, so dreadful for a son;
when Valentine, pale with emotion, had wiped away a tear; when
Villefort, trembling, and crouched in a corner, had endeavored to
lessen the storm by supplicating glances at the implacable old man,—

“Sir,” said d’Épinay to Noirtier, “since you are well acquainted with
all these details, which are attested by honorable signatures,—since
you appear to take some interest in me, although you have only
manifested it hitherto by causing me sorrow, refuse me not one final
satisfaction—tell me the name of the president of the club, that I may
at least know who killed my father.”

Villefort mechanically felt for the handle of the door; Valentine, who
understood sooner than anyone her grandfather’s answer, and who had
often seen two scars upon his right arm, drew back a few steps.

“Mademoiselle,” said Franz, turning towards Valentine, “unite your
efforts with mine to find out the name of the man who made me an orphan
at two years of age.” Valentine remained dumb and motionless.

“Hold, sir,” said Villefort, “do not prolong this dreadful scene. The
names have been purposely concealed; my father himself does not know
who this president was, and if he knows, he cannot tell you; proper
names are not in the dictionary.”

“Oh, misery,” cried Franz: “the only hope which sustained me and
enabled me to read to the end was that of knowing, at least, the name
of him who killed my father! Sir, sir,” cried he, turning to Noirtier,
“do what you can—make me understand in some way!”

“Yes,” replied Noirtier.

“Oh, mademoiselle, mademoiselle!” cried Franz, “your grandfather says
he can indicate the person. Help me,—lend me your assistance!”

Noirtier looked at the dictionary. Franz took it with a nervous
trembling, and repeated the letters of the alphabet successively, until
he came to M. At that letter the old man signified “Yes.”

“M,” repeated Franz. The young man’s finger, glided over the words, but
at each one Noirtier answered by a negative sign. Valentine hid her
head between her hands. At length, Franz arrived at the word MYSELF.

40046m



“Yes!”

“You!” cried Franz, whose hair stood on end; “you, M. Noirtier—you
killed my father?”

“Yes!” replied Noirtier, fixing a majestic look on the young man. Franz
fell p