, of the captain’s brave conduct during the storm, and tried to
console him. He brought him also the amount of his wages, which Captain
Gaumard had not dared to apply for.

As he descended the staircase, Morrel met Penelon, who was going up.
Penelon had, it would seem, made good use of his money, for he was
newly clad. When he saw his employer, the worthy tar seemed much
embarrassed, drew on one side into the corner of the landing-place,
passed his quid from one cheek to the other, stared stupidly with his
great eyes, and only acknowledged the squeeze of the hand which Morrel
as usual gave him by a slight pressure in return. Morrel attributed
Penelon’s embarrassment to the elegance of his attire; it was evident
the good fellow had not gone to such an expense on his own account; he
was, no doubt, engaged on board some other vessel, and thus his
bashfulness arose from the fact of his not having, if we may so express
ourselves, worn mourning for the _Pharaon_ longer. Perhaps he had come
to tell Captain Gaumard of his good luck, and to offer him employment
from his new master.

“Worthy fellows!” said Morrel,  as he went away, “may your new master
love you as I loved you, and be more fortunate than I have been!”

20049m



August rolled by in unceasing efforts on the part of Morrel to renew
his credit or revive the old. On the 20th of August it was known at
Marseilles that he had left town in the mailcoach, and then it was said
that the bills would go to protest at the end of the month, and that
Morrel had gone away and left his chief clerk Emmanuel, and his cashier
Cocles, to meet the creditors. But, contrary to all expectation, when
the 31st of August came, the house opened as usual, and Cocles appeared
behind the grating of the counter, examined all bills presented with
the usual scrutiny, and, from first to last, paid all with the usual
precision. There came in, moreover, two drafts which M. Morrel had
fully anticipated, and which Cocles paid as punctually as the bills
which the shipowner had accepted. All this was incomprehensible, and
then, with the tenacity peculiar to prophets of bad news, the failure
was put off until the end of September.

On the 1st, Morrel returned; he was awaited by his family with extreme
anxiety, for from this journey to Paris they hoped great things. Morrel
had thought of Danglars, who was now immensely rich, and had lain under
great obligations to Morrel in former days, since to him it was owing
that Danglars entered the service of the Spanish banker, with whom he
had laid the foundations of his vast wealth. It was said at this moment
that Danglars was worth from six to eight millions of francs, and had
unlimited credit. Danglars, then, without taking a crown from his
pocket, could save Morrel; he had but to pass his word for a loan, and
Morrel was saved. Morrel had long thought of Danglars, but had kept
away from some instinctive motive, and had delayed as long as possible
availing himself of this last resource. And Morrel was right, for he
returned home crushed by the humiliation of a refusal.

Yet, on his arrival, Morrel did not utter a complaint, or say one harsh
word. He embraced his weeping wife and daughter, pressed Emmanuel’s
hand with friendly warmth, and then going to his private room on the
second floor had sent for Cocles.

“Then,” said the two women to Emmanuel, “we are indeed ruined.”

It was agreed in a brief council held among them, that Julie should
write to her brother, who was in garrison at Nîmes, to come to them as
speedily as possible. The poor women felt instinctively that they
required all their strength to support the blow that impended. Besides,
Maximilian Morrel, though hardly two-and-twenty, had great influence
over his father.

He was a strong-minded, upright young man. At the time when he decided
on his profession his father had no desire to choose for him, but had
consulted young Maximilian’s taste