 is a miser.” Hatred evidently inspired the Englishman, who, knowing
no other reproach to bring on the count, accused him of avarice.

“Do you know his house at Auteuil?”

“Certainly.”

“What do you know respecting it?”

“Do you wish to know why he bought it?”

“Yes.”

“The count is a speculator, who will certainly ruin himself in
experiments. He supposes there is in the neighborhood of the house he
has bought a mineral spring equal to those at Bagnères, Luchon, and
Cauterets. He is going to turn his house into a _Badhaus_, as the
Germans term it. He has already dug up all the garden two or three
times to find the famous spring, and, being unsuccessful, he will soon
purchase all the contiguous houses. Now, as I dislike him, and hope his
railway, his electric telegraph, or his search for baths, will ruin
him, I am watching for his discomfiture, which must soon take place.”

“What was the cause of your quarrel?”

“When he was in England he seduced the wife of one of my friends.”

“Why do you not seek revenge?”

“I have already fought three duels with him,” said the Englishman, “the
first with the pistol, the second with the sword, and the third with
the sabre.”

“And what was the result of those duels?”

“The first time, he broke my arm; the second, he wounded me in the
breast; and the third time, made this large wound.” The Englishman
turned down his shirt-collar, and showed a scar, whose redness proved
it to be a recent one. “So that, you see, there is a deadly feud
between us.”

“But,” said the envoy, “you do not go about it in the right way to kill
him, if I understand you correctly.”

“Aw?” said the Englishman, “I practice shooting every day, and every
other day Grisier comes to my house.”

This was all the visitor wished to ascertain, or, rather, all the
Englishman appeared to know. The agent arose, and having bowed to Lord
Wilmore, who returned his salutation with the stiff politeness of the
English, he retired. Lord Wilmore, having heard the door close after
him, returned to his bedroom, where with one hand he pulled off his
light hair, his red whiskers, his false jaw, and his wound, to resume
the black hair, dark complexion, and pearly teeth of the Count of Monte
Cristo.

It was M. de Villefort, and not the prefect, who returned to the house
of M. de Villefort. The procureur felt more at ease, although he had
learned nothing really satisfactory, and, for the first time since the
dinner-party at Auteuil, he slept soundly.



 Chapter 70. The Ball

It was in the warmest days of July, when in due course of time the
Saturday arrived upon which the ball was to take place at M. de
Morcerf’s. It was ten o’clock at night; the branches of the great trees
in the garden of the count’s house stood out boldly against the azure
canopy of heaven, which was studded with golden stars, but where the
last fleeting clouds of a vanishing storm yet lingered.

From the apartments on the ground floor might be heard the sound of
music, with the whirl of the waltz and galop, while brilliant streams
of light shone through the openings of the Venetian blinds. At this
moment the garden was only occupied by about ten servants, who had just
received orders from their mistress to prepare the supper, the serenity
of the weather continuing to increase. Until now, it had been undecided
whether the supper should take place in the dining-room, or under a
long tent erected on the lawn, but the beautiful blue sky, studded with
stars, had settled the question in favor of the lawn.

The gardens were illuminated with colored lanterns, according to the
Italian custom, and, as is usual in countries where the luxuries of the
table—the rarest of all luxuries in their complete form—are well
understood, the supper-table was loaded with wax-lights and flowers.

30297m



At the time the Countess of Morcerf returned to the rooms, after giving
her orders, many guests were arrivin