 plague or of cholera morbus had broken
out among the guests.

In a few minutes, through all the doors, down all the staircases, by
every exit, everyone hastened to retire, or rather to fly; for it was a
situation where the ordinary condolences,—which even the best friends
are so eager to offer in great catastrophes,—were seen to be utterly
futile. There remained in the banker’s house only Danglars, closeted in
his study, and making his statement to the officer of gendarmes; Madame
Danglars, terrified, in the boudoir with which we are acquainted; and
Eugénie, who with haughty air and disdainful lip had retired to her
room with her inseparable companion, Mademoiselle Louise d’Armilly.

As for the numerous servants (more numerous that evening than usual,
for their number was augmented by cooks and butlers from the Café de
Paris), venting on their employers their anger at what they termed the
insult to which they had been subjected, they collected in groups in
the hall, in the kitchens, or in their rooms, thinking very little of
their duty, which was thus naturally interrupted. Of all this
household, only two persons deserve our notice; these are Mademoiselle
Eugénie Danglars and Mademoiselle Louise d’Armilly.

The betrothed had retired, as we said, with haughty air, disdainful
lip, and the demeanor of an outraged queen, followed by her companion,
who was paler and more disturbed than herself. On reaching her room
Eugénie locked her door, while Louise fell on a chair.

“Ah, what a dreadful thing,” said the young musician; “who would have
suspected it? M. Andrea Cavalcanti a murderer—a galley-slave escaped—a
convict!”

An ironical smile curled the lip of Eugénie. “In truth, I was fated,”
said she. “I escaped the Morcerf only to fall into the Cavalcanti.”

“Oh, do not confound the two, Eugénie.”

“Hold your tongue! The men are all infamous, and I am happy to be able
now to do more than detest them—I despise them.”

“What shall we do?” asked Louise.

“What shall we do?”

“Yes.”

“Why, the same we had intended doing three days since—set off.”

“What?—although you are not now going to be married, you intend
still——”

“Listen, Louise. I hate this life of the fashionable world, always
ordered, measured, ruled, like our music-paper. What I have always
wished for, desired, and coveted, is the life of an artist, free and
independent, relying only on my own resources, and accountable only to
myself. Remain here? What for?—that they may try, a month hence, to
marry me again; and to whom?—M. Debray, perhaps, as it was once
proposed. No, Louise, no! This evening’s adventure will serve for my
excuse. I did not seek one, I did not ask for one. God sends me this,
and I hail it joyfully!”

“How strong and courageous you are!” said the fair, frail girl to her
brunette companion.

“Did you not yet know me? Come, Louise, let us talk of our affairs. The
post-chaise——”

“Was happily bought three days since.”

“Have you had it sent where we are to go for it?”

“Yes.”

“Our passport?”

“Here it is.”

And Eugénie, with her usual precision, opened a printed paper, and
read:

“M. Léon d’Armilly, twenty years of age; profession, artist; hair
black, eyes black; travelling with his sister.”

“Capital! How did you get this passport?”

“When I went to ask M. de Monte Cristo for letters to the directors of
the theatres at Rome and Naples, I expressed my fears of travelling as
a woman; he perfectly understood them, and undertook to procure for me
a man’s passport, and two days after I received this, to which I have
added with my own hand, ‘travelling with his sister.’”

50035m



“Well,” said Eugénie cheerfully, “we have then only to pack up our
trunks; we shall start the evening of the signing of the contract,
instead of the evening of the wedding—that is all.”

“But consider the matter seriously, Eugénie!”

“Oh, I am done with considering! I am tired of hearing on