is side, however great
Franz’s desire was to allude to their former interview, the fear of
being disagreeable to the man who had loaded him and his friend with
kindness prevented him from mentioning it.

The count had learned that the two friends had sent to secure a box at
the Argentina Theatre, and were told they were all let. In consequence,
he brought them the key of his own—at least such was the apparent
motive of his visit. Franz and Albert made some difficulty, alleging
their fear of depriving him of it; but the count replied that, as he
was going to the Palli Theatre, the box at the Argentina Theatre would
be lost if they did not profit by it. This assurance determined the two
friends to accept it.

Franz had by degrees become accustomed to the count’s pallor, which had
so forcibly struck him at their first meeting. He could not refrain
from admiring the severe beauty of his features, the only defect, or
rather the principal quality of which was the pallor. Truly, a Byronic
hero! Franz could not, we will not say see him, but even think of him
without imagining his stern head upon Manfred’s shoulders, or beneath
Lara’s helmet. His forehead was marked with the line that indicates the
constant presence of bitter thoughts; he had the fiery eyes that seem
to penetrate to the very soul, and the haughty and disdainful upper lip
that gives to the words it utters a peculiar character that impresses
them on the minds of those to whom they are addressed.

The count was no longer young. He was at least forty; and yet it was
easy to understand that he was formed to rule the young men with whom
he associated at present. And, to complete his resemblance with the
fantastic heroes of the English poet, the count seemed to have the
power of fascination. Albert was constantly expatiating on their good
fortune in meeting such a man. Franz was less enthusiastic; but the
count exercised over him also the ascendency a strong mind always
acquires over a mind less domineering. He thought several times of the
project the count had of visiting Paris; and he had no doubt but that,
with his eccentric character, his characteristic face, and his colossal
fortune, he would produce a great effect there. And yet he did not wish
to be at Paris when the count was there.

The evening passed as evenings mostly pass at Italian theatres; that
is, not in listening to the music, but in paying visits and conversing.
The Countess G—— wished to revive the subject of the count, but Franz
announced he had something far newer to tell her, and, in spite of
Albert’s demonstrations of false modesty, he informed the countess of
the great event which had preoccupied them for the last three days. As
similar intrigues are not uncommon in Italy, if we may credit
travellers, the comtess did not manifest the least incredulity, but
congratulated Albert on his success. They promised, upon separating, to
meet at the Duke of Bracciano’s ball, to which all Rome was invited.

The heroine of the bouquet kept her word; she gave Albert no sign of
her existence the morrow or the day after.

At length Tuesday came, the last and most tumultuous day of the
Carnival. On Tuesday, the theatres open at ten o’clock in the morning,
as Lent begins after eight at night. On Tuesday, all those who through
want of money, time, or enthusiasm, have not been to see the Carnival
before, mingle in the gayety, and contribute to the noise and
excitement. From two o’clock till five Franz and Albert followed in the
_fête_, exchanging handfuls of _confetti_ with the other carriages and
the pedestrians, who crowded amongst the horses’ feet and the carriage
wheels without a single accident, a single dispute, or a single fight.

The _fêtes_ are veritable pleasure days to the Italians. The author of
this history, who has resided five or six years in Italy, does not
recollect to have ever seen a ceremony interrupted by one of those
events so common i