changed a second look, more full of amazement than the first. The
notary looked at Villefort.

“It is impossible,” said the procureur. “M. d’Épinay cannot leave the
drawing-room at present.”

“It is at this moment,” replied Barrois with the same firmness, “that
M. Noirtier, my master, wishes to speak on important subjects to M.
Franz d’Épinay.”

“Grandpapa Noirtier can speak now, then,” said Edward, with his
habitual quickness. However, his remark did not make Madame de
Villefort even smile, so much was every mind engaged, and so solemn was
the situation.

“Tell M. Nortier,” resumed Villefort, “that what he demands is
impossible.”

“Then, M. Nortier gives notice to these gentlemen,” replied Barrois,
“that he will give orders to be carried to the drawing-room.”

Astonishment was at its height. Something like a smile was perceptible
on Madame de Villefort’s countenance. Valentine instinctively raised
her eyes, as if to thank heaven.

“Pray go, Valentine,” said; M. de Villefort, “and see what this new
fancy of your grandfather’s is.” Valentine rose quickly, and was
hastening joyfully towards the door, when M. de Villefort altered his
intention.

“Stop,” said he; “I will go with you.”

“Excuse me, sir,” said Franz, “since M. Noirtier sent for me, I am
ready to attend to his wish; besides, I shall be happy to pay my
respects to him, not having yet had the honor of doing so.”

“Pray, sir,” said Villefort with marked uneasiness, “do not disturb
yourself.”

40032m



“Forgive me, sir,” said Franz in a resolute tone. “I would not lose
this opportunity of proving to M. Noirtier how wrong it would be of him
to encourage feelings of dislike to me, which I am determined to
conquer, whatever they may be, by my devotion.”

And without listening to Villefort he arose, and followed Valentine,
who was running downstairs with the joy of a shipwrecked mariner who
finds a rock to cling to. M. de Villefort followed them. Château-Renaud
and Morcerf exchanged a third look of still increasing wonder.



 Chapter 75. A Signed Statement

Noirtier was prepared to receive them, dressed in black, and installed
in his armchair. When the three persons he expected had entered, he
looked at the door, which his valet immediately closed.

“Listen,” whispered Villefort to Valentine, who could not conceal her
joy; “if M. Noirtier wishes to communicate anything which would delay
your marriage, I forbid you to understand him.”

Valentine blushed, but did not answer. Villefort, approached Noirtier.

“Here is M. Franz d’Épinay,” said he; “you requested to see him. We
have all wished for this interview, and I trust it will convince you
how ill-formed are your objections to Valentine’s marriage.”

Noirtier answered only by a look which made Villefort’s blood run cold.
He motioned to Valentine to approach. In a moment, thanks to her habit
of conversing with her grandfather, she understood that he asked for a
key. Then his eye was fixed on the drawer of a small chest between the
windows. She opened the drawer, and found a key; and, understanding
that was what he wanted, again watched his eyes, which turned toward an
old secretaire which had been neglected for many years and was supposed
to contain nothing but useless documents.

“Shall I open the secretaire?” asked Valentine.

“Yes,” said the old man.

“And the drawers?”

“Yes.”

“Those at the side?”

“No.”

“The middle one?”

“Yes.”

Valentine opened it and drew out a bundle of papers. “Is that what you
wish for?” asked she.

“No.”

She took successively all the other papers out till the drawer was
empty. “But there are no more,” said she. Noirtier’s eye was fixed on
the dictionary.

“Yes, I understand, grandfather,” said the young girl.

40036m



She pointed to each letter of the alphabet. At the letter S the old man
stopped her. She opened, and found the word “secret.”

“Ah! is there a secret spring?” said