eir high-piled and yielding cushions to such as
desired repose or refreshment. Splendid paintings by the first masters
were ranged against the walls, intermingled with magnificent trophies
of war, while heavy curtains of costly tapestry were suspended before
the different doors of the room.

“If your excellencies will please to be seated,” said the man, “I will
let the count know that you are here.”

And with these words he disappeared behind one of the tapestried
_portières_. As the door opened, the sound of a _guzla_ reached the
ears of the young men, but was almost immediately lost, for the rapid
closing of the door merely allowed one rich swell of harmony to enter.
Franz and Albert looked inquiringly at each other, then at the gorgeous
furnishings of the apartment. Everything seemed more magnificent at a
second view than it had done at their first rapid survey.

“Well,” said Franz to his friend, “what think you of all this?”

“Why, upon my soul, my dear fellow, it strikes me that our elegant and
attentive neighbor must either be some successful stock-jobber who has
speculated in the fall of the Spanish funds, or some prince travelling
_incog_.”

“Hush, hush!” replied Franz; “we shall ascertain who and what he is—he
comes!”

As Franz spoke, he heard the sound of a door turning on its hinges, and
almost immediately afterwards the tapestry was drawn aside, and the
owner of all these riches stood before the two young men. Albert
instantly rose to meet him, but Franz remained, in a manner, spellbound
on his chair; for in the person of him who had just entered he
recognized not only the mysterious visitant to the Colosseum, and the
occupant of the box at the Teatro Argentina, but also his extraordinary
host of Monte Cristo.

20157m




 Chapter 35. La Mazzolata

Gentlemen,” said the Count of Monte Cristo as he entered, “I pray you
excuse me for suffering my visit to be anticipated; but I feared to
disturb you by presenting myself earlier at your apartments; besides,
you sent me word that you would come to me, and I have held myself at
your disposal.”

“Franz and I have to thank you a thousand times, count,” returned
Albert; “you extricated us from a great dilemma, and we were on the
point of inventing a very fantastic vehicle when your friendly
invitation reached us.”

“Indeed,” returned the count, motioning the two young men to sit down.
“It was the fault of that blockhead Pastrini, that I did not sooner
assist you in your distress. He did not mention a syllable of your
embarrassment to me, when he knows that, alone and isolated as I am, I
seek every opportunity of making the acquaintance of my neighbors. As
soon as I learned I could in any way assist you, I most eagerly seized
the opportunity of offering my services.”

The two young men bowed. Franz had, as yet, found nothing to say; he
had come to no determination, and as nothing in the count’s manner
manifested the wish that he should recognize him, he did not know
whether to make any allusion to the past, or wait until he had more
proof; besides, although sure it was he who had been in the box the
previous evening, he could not be equally positive that this was the
man he had seen at the Colosseum. He resolved, therefore, to let things
take their course without making any direct overture to the count.
Moreover, he had this advantage, he was master of the count’s secret,
while the count had no hold on Franz, who had nothing to conceal.
However, he resolved to lead the conversation to a subject which might
possibly clear up his doubts.

“Count,” said he, “you have offered us places in your carriage, and at
your windows in the Rospoli Palace. Can you tell us where we can obtain
a sight of the Piazza del Popolo?”

“Ah,” said the count negligently, looking attentively at Morcerf, “is
there not something like an execution upon the Piazza del Popolo?”

“Yes,” returned Franz, finding that the count wa