young person, M. de Morcerf?” inquired Eugénie; “does
anybody know?”

“Mademoiselle,” said Albert, replying to this direct appeal, “I can
give you very exact information on that subject, as well as on most
points relative to the mysterious person of whom we are now
conversing—the young woman is a Greek.”

“So I should suppose by her dress; if you know no more than that,
everyone here is as well-informed as yourself.”

“I am extremely sorry you find me so ignorant a _cicerone_,” replied
Morcerf, “but I am reluctantly obliged to confess, I have nothing
further to communicate—yes, stay, I do know one thing more, namely,
that she is a musician, for one day when I chanced to be breakfasting
with the count, I heard the sound of a guzla—it is impossible that it
could have been touched by any other finger than her own.”

“Then your count entertains visitors, does he?” asked Madame Danglars.

“Indeed he does, and in a most lavish manner, I can assure you.”

“I must try and persuade M. Danglars to invite him to a ball or dinner,
or something of the sort, that he may be compelled to ask us in
return.”

“What,” said Debray, laughing; “do you really mean you would go to his
house?”

“Why not? my husband could accompany me.”

“But do you know this mysterious count is a bachelor?”

“You have ample proof to the contrary, if you look opposite,” said the
baroness, as she laughingly pointed to the beautiful Greek.

“No, no!” exclaimed Debray; “that girl is not his wife: he told us
himself she was his slave. Do you not recollect, Morcerf, his telling
us so at your breakfast?”

“Well, then,” said the baroness, “if slave she be, she has all the air
and manner of a princess.”

“Of the ‘Arabian Nights’.”

“If you like; but tell me, my dear Lucien, what it is that constitutes
a princess. Why, diamonds—and she is covered with them.”

“To me she seems overloaded,” observed Eugénie; “she would look far
better if she wore fewer, and we should then be able to see her finely
formed throat and wrists.”

“See how the artist peeps out!” exclaimed Madame Danglars. “My poor
Eugénie, you must conceal your passion for the fine arts.”

“I admire all that is beautiful,” returned the young lady.

“What do you think of the count?” inquired Debray; “he is not much
amiss, according to my ideas of good looks.”

“The count,” repeated Eugénie, as though it had not occurred to her to
observe him sooner; “the count?—oh, he is so dreadfully pale.”

“I quite agree with you,” said Morcerf; “and the secret of that very
pallor is what we want to find out. The Countess G—— insists upon it
that he is a vampire.”

“Then the Countess G—— has returned to Paris, has she?” inquired the
baroness.

“Is that she, mamma?” asked Eugénie; “almost opposite to us, with that
profusion of beautiful light hair?”

“Yes,” said Madame Danglars, “that is she. Shall I tell you what you
ought to do, Morcerf?”

“Command me, madame.”

“Well, then, you should go and bring your Count of Monte Cristo to us.”

“What for?” asked Eugénie.

“What for? Why, to converse with him, of course. Have you really no
desire to meet him?”

“None whatever,” replied Eugénie.

“Strange child,” murmured the baroness.

“He will very probably come of his own accord,” said Morcerf. “There;
do you see, madame, he recognizes you, and bows.”

The baroness returned the salute in the most smiling and graceful
manner.

“Well,” said Morcerf, “I may as well be magnanimous, and tear myself
away to forward your wishes. Adieu; I will go and try if there are any
means of speaking to him.”

“Go straight to his box; that will be the simplest plan.”

“But I have never been presented.”

“Presented to whom?”

“To the beautiful Greek.”

“You say she is only a slave?”

“While you assert that she is a queen, or at least a princess. No; I
hope that when he sees me leave you, he will come out.”

“That is possible—go.”

“I am going,” said A