ven
yourself up to sloth and drunkenness, and in a fit of intoxication have
ruined your best friend.”

“Help!” cried Caderousse; “I require a surgeon, not a priest; perhaps I
am not mortally wounded—I may not die; perhaps they can yet save my
life.”

“Your wounds are so far mortal that, without the three drops I gave
you, you would now be dead. Listen, then.”

“Ah,” murmured Caderousse, “what a strange priest you are; you drive
the dying to despair, instead of consoling them.”

“Listen,” continued the abbé. “When you had betrayed your friend, God
began not to strike, but to warn you. Poverty overtook you. You had
already passed half your life in coveting that which you might have
honorably acquired; and already you contemplated crime under the excuse
of want, when God worked a miracle in your behalf, sending you, by my
hands, a fortune—brilliant, indeed, for you, who had never possessed
any. But this unexpected, unhoped-for, unheard-of fortune sufficed you
no longer when you once possessed it; you wished to double it, and
how?—by a murder! You succeeded, and then God snatched it from you, and
brought you to justice.”

“It was not I who wished to kill the Jew,” said Caderousse; “it was La
Carconte.”

“Yes,” said Monte Cristo, “and God,—I cannot say in justice, for his
justice would have slain you,—but God, in his mercy, spared your life.”

“_Pardieu!_ to transport me for life, how merciful!”

“You thought it a mercy then, miserable wretch! The coward who feared
death rejoiced at perpetual disgrace; for like all galley-slaves, you
said, ‘I may escape from prison, I cannot from the grave.’ And you said
truly; the way was opened for you unexpectedly. An Englishman visited
Toulon, who had vowed to rescue two men from infamy, and his choice
fell on you and your companion. You received a second fortune, money
and tranquillity were restored to you, and you, who had been condemned
to a felon’s life, might live as other men. Then, wretched creature,
then you tempted God a third time. ‘I have not enough,’ you said, when
you had more than you before possessed, and you committed a third
crime, without reason, without excuse. God is wearied; he has punished
you.”

Caderousse was fast sinking. “Give me drink,” said he: “I thirst—I
burn!” Monte Cristo gave him a glass of water. “And yet that villain,
Benedetto, will escape!”

“No one, I tell you, will escape; Benedetto will be punished.”

“Then, you, too, will be punished, for you did not do your duty as a
priest—you should have prevented Benedetto from killing me.”

“I?” said the count, with a smile which petrified the dying man, “when
you had just broken your knife against the coat of mail which protected
my breast! Yet perhaps if I had found you humble and penitent, I might
have prevented Benedetto from killing you; but I found you proud and
blood-thirsty, and I left you in the hands of God.”

“I do not believe there is a God,” howled Caderousse; “you do not
believe it; you lie—you lie!”

“Silence,” said the abbé; “you will force the last drop of blood from
your veins. What! you do not believe in God when he is striking you
dead? you will not believe in him, who requires but a prayer, a word, a
tear, and he will forgive? God, who might have directed the assassin’s
dagger so as to end your career in a moment, has given you this quarter
of an hour for repentance. Reflect, then, wretched man, and repent.”

“No,” said Caderousse, “no; I will not repent. There is no God; there
is no Providence—all comes by chance.”

“There is a Providence; there is a God,” said Monte Cristo, “of whom
you are a striking proof, as you lie in utter despair, denying him,
while I stand before you, rich, happy, safe and entreating that God in
whom you endeavor not to believe, while in your heart you still believe
in him.”

“But who are you, then?” asked Caderousse, fixing his dying eyes on the
count.

“Look well at me!” said Monte Cris