 return to human and material existence, and if you are still the
friend you profess to be, help me to discover the hand that struck the
blow.”

“Be it so,” said Beauchamp; “if you must have me descend to earth, I
submit; and if you will seek your enemy, I will assist you, and I will
engage to find him, my honor being almost as deeply interested as
yours.”

“Well, then, you understand, Beauchamp, that we begin our search
immediately. Each moment’s delay is an eternity for me. The calumniator
is not yet punished, and he may hope that he will not be; but, on my
honor, if he thinks so, he deceives himself.”

“Well, listen, Morcerf.”

“Ah, Beauchamp, I see you know something already; you will restore me
to life.”

“I do not say there is any truth in what I am going to tell you, but it
is, at least, a ray of light in a dark night; by following it we may,
perhaps, discover something more certain.”

“Tell me; satisfy my impatience.”

“Well, I will tell you what I did not like to mention on my return from
Yanina.”

“Say on.”

“I went, of course, to the chief banker of the town to make inquiries.
At the first word, before I had even mentioned your father’s name”—

“‘Ah,’ said he. ‘I guess what brings you here.’

“‘How, and why?’

“‘Because a fortnight since I was questioned on the same subject.’

“‘By whom?’

“‘By a banker of Paris, my correspondent.’

“‘Whose name is——’

“‘Danglars.’”

“He!” cried Albert; “yes, it is indeed he who has so long pursued my
father with jealous hatred. He, the man who would be popular, cannot
forgive the Count of Morcerf for being created a peer; and this
marriage broken off without a reason being assigned—yes, it is all from
the same cause.”

“Make inquiries, Albert, but do not be angry without reason; make
inquiries, and if it be true——”

“Oh, yes, if it be true,” cried the young man, “he shall pay me all I
have suffered.”

“Beware, Morcerf, he is already an old man.”

“I will respect his age as he has respected the honor of my family; if
my father had offended him, why did he not attack him personally? Oh,
no, he was afraid to encounter him face to face.”

“I do not condemn you, Albert; I only restrain you. Act prudently.”

“Oh, do not fear; besides, you will accompany me. Beauchamp, solemn
transactions should be sanctioned by a witness. Before this day closes,
if M. Danglars is guilty, he shall cease to live, or I shall die.
_Pardieu_, Beauchamp, mine shall be a splendid funeral!”

“When such resolutions are made, Albert, they should be promptly
executed. Do you wish to go to M. Danglars? Let us go immediately.”

They sent for a cabriolet. On entering the banker’s mansion, they
perceived the phaeton and servant of M. Andrea Cavalcanti.

“Ah! _parbleu!_ that’s good,” said Albert, with a gloomy tone. “If M.
Danglars will not fight with me, I will kill his son-in-law; Cavalcanti
will certainly fight.”

The servant announced the young man; but the banker, recollecting what
had transpired the day before, did not wish him admitted. It was,
however, too late; Albert had followed the footman, and, hearing the
order given, forced the door open, and followed by Beauchamp found
himself in the banker’s study.

“Sir,” cried the latter, “am I no longer at liberty to receive whom I
choose in my house? You appear to forget yourself sadly.”

“No, sir,” said Albert, coldly; “there are circumstances in which one
cannot, except through cowardice,—I offer you that refuge,—refuse to
admit certain persons at least.”

“What is your errand, then, with me, sir?”

“I mean,” said Albert, drawing near, and without apparently noticing
Cavalcanti, who stood with his back towards the fireplace—“I mean to
propose a meeting in some retired corner where no one will interrupt us
for ten minutes; that will be sufficient—where two men having met, one
of them will remain on the ground.”

Danglars turned pale; Cavalcanti moved a step forwar