As Franz was about to take leave of M. de Villefort, “When shall I see
you again?” said the latter.

“At what time you please, sir,” replied Franz.

“As soon as possible.”

“I am at your command, sir; shall we return together?”

“If not unpleasant to you.”

“On the contrary, I shall feel much pleasure.”

Thus, the future father and son-in-law stepped into the same carriage,
and Morrel, seeing them pass, became uneasy. Villefort and Franz
returned to the Faubourg Saint-Honoré. The procureur, without going to
see either his wife or his daughter, went at once to his study, and,
offering the young man a chair:

“M. d’Épinay,” said he, “allow me to remind you at this moment,—which
is perhaps not so ill-chosen as at first sight may appear, for
obedience to the wishes of the departed is the first offering which
should be made at their tomb,—allow me then to remind you of the wish
expressed by Madame de Saint-Méran on her death-bed, that Valentine’s
wedding might not be deferred. You know the affairs of the deceased are
in perfect order, and her will bequeaths to Valentine the entire
property of the Saint-Méran family; the notary showed me the documents
yesterday, which will enable us to draw up the contract immediately.
You may call on the notary, M. Deschamps, Place Beauveau, Faubourg
Saint-Honoré, and you have my authority to inspect those deeds.”

“Sir,” replied M. d’Épinay, “it is not, perhaps, the moment for
Mademoiselle Valentine, who is in deep distress, to think of a husband;
indeed, I fear——”

40028m



“Valentine will have no greater pleasure than that of fulfilling her
grandmother’s last injunctions; there will be no obstacle from that
quarter, I assure you.”

“In that case,” replied Franz, “as I shall raise none, you may make
arrangements when you please; I have pledged my word, and shall feel
pleasure and happiness in adhering to it.”

“Then,” said Villefort, “nothing further is required. The contract was
to have been signed three days since; we shall find it all ready, and
can sign it today.”

“But the mourning?” said Franz, hesitating.

“Don’t be uneasy on that score,” replied Villefort; “no ceremony will
be neglected in my house. Mademoiselle de Villefort may retire during
the prescribed three months to her estate of Saint-Méran; I say hers,
for she inherits it today. There, after a few days, if you like, the
civil marriage shall be celebrated without pomp or ceremony. Madame de
Saint-Méran wished her daughter should be married there. When that is
over, you, sir, can return to Paris, while your wife passes the time of
her mourning with her mother-in-law.”

“As you please, sir,” said Franz.

“Then,” replied M. de Villefort, “have the kindness to wait half an
hour; Valentine shall come down into the drawing-room. I will send for
M. Deschamps; we will read and sign the contract before we separate,
and this evening Madame de Villefort shall accompany Valentine to her
estate, where we will rejoin them in a week.”

“Sir,” said Franz, “I have one request to make.”

“What is it?”

“I wish Albert de Morcerf and Raoul de Château-Renaud to be present at
this signature; you know they are my witnesses.”

“Half an hour will suffice to apprise them; will you go for them
yourself, or shall you send?”

“I prefer going, sir.”

“I shall expect you, then, in half an hour, baron, and Valentine will
be ready.”

Franz bowed and left the room. Scarcely had the door closed, when M. de
Villefort sent to tell Valentine to be ready in the drawing-room in
half an hour, as he expected the notary and M. d’Épinay and his
witnesses. The news caused a great sensation throughout the house;
Madame de Villefort would not believe it, and Valentine was
thunderstruck. She looked around for help, and would have gone down to
her grandfather’s room, but on the stairs she met M. de Villefort, who
took her arm and led her into the drawing-room. In the anteroom,
Valentine