alet de chambre announced:

“M. de Boville, Receiver-General of the charities.”

“_Ma foi_,” said Monte Cristo; “I think I arrived just in time to
obtain your signatures, or they would have been disputed with me.”

Danglars again became pale, and hastened to conduct the count out.
Monte Cristo exchanged a ceremonious bow with M. de Boville, who was
standing in the waiting-room, and who was introduced into Danglars’
room as soon as the count had left.

The count’s serious face was illumined by a faint smile, as he noticed
the portfolio which the receiver-general held in his hand. At the door
he found his carriage, and was immediately driven to the bank.
Meanwhile Danglars, repressing all emotion, advanced to meet the
receiver-general. We need not say that a smile of condescension was
stamped upon his lips.

“Good-morning, creditor,” said he; “for I wager anything it is the
creditor who visits me.”

“You are right, baron,” answered M. de Boville; “the charities present
themselves to you through me; the widows and orphans depute me to
receive alms to the amount of five millions from you.”

“And yet they say orphans are to be pitied,” said Danglars, wishing to
prolong the jest. “Poor things!”

“Here I am in their name,” said M. de Boville; “but did you receive my
letter yesterday?”

“Yes.”

“I have brought my receipt.”

50111m



“My dear M. de Boville, your widows and orphans must oblige me by
waiting twenty-four hours, since M. de Monte Cristo whom you just saw
leaving here—you did see him, I think?”

“Yes; well?”

“Well, M. de Monte Cristo has just carried off their five millions.”

“How so?”

“The count has an unlimited credit upon me; a credit opened by Thomson
& French, of Rome; he came to demand five millions at once, which I
paid him with checks on the bank. My funds are deposited there, and you
can understand that if I draw out ten millions on the same day it will
appear rather strange to the governor. Two days will be a different
thing,” said Danglars, smiling.

“Come,” said Boville, with a tone of entire incredulity, “five millions
to that gentleman who just left, and who bowed to me as though he knew
me?”

“Perhaps he knows you, though you do not know him; M. de Monte Cristo
knows everybody.”

“Five millions!”

“Here is his receipt. Believe your own eyes.” M. de Boville took the
paper Danglars presented him, and read:

“Received of Baron Danglars the sum of five million one hundred
thousand francs, to be repaid on demand by the house of Thomson &
French of Rome.”

“It is really true,” said M. de Boville.

“Do you know the house of Thomson & French?”

“Yes, I once had business to transact with it to the amount of 200,000
francs; but since then I have not heard it mentioned.”

“It is one of the best houses in Europe,” said Danglars, carelessly
throwing down the receipt on his desk.

“And he had five millions in your hands alone! Why, this Count of Monte
Cristo must be a nabob?”

“Indeed I do not know what he is; he has three unlimited credits—one on
me, one on Rothschild, one on Lafitte; and, you see,” he added
carelessly, “he has given me the preference, by leaving a balance of
100,000 francs.”

M. de Boville manifested signs of extraordinary admiration.

“I must visit him,” he said, “and obtain some pious grant from him.”

“Oh, you may make sure of him; his charities alone amount to 20,000
francs a month.”

“It is magnificent! I will set before him the example of Madame de
Morcerf and her son.”

“What example?”

“They gave all their fortune to the hospitals.”

“What fortune?”

“Their own—M. de Morcerf’s, who is deceased.”

“For what reason?”

“Because they would not spend money so guiltily acquired.”

“And what are they to live upon?”

“The mother retires into the country, and the son enters the army.”

50113m



“Well, I must confess, these are scruples.”

“I registered their deed of gift yesterda