 a house of mourning, the consequences of a scene so horrible
that the neighbors remember and speak of it to this day. Acting by my
advice, my poor sister had refused to comply with the unreasonable
demands of Benedetto, who was continually tormenting her for money, as
long as he believed there was a sou left in her possession. One morning
he threatened her with the severest consequences if she did not supply
him with what he desired, and disappeared and remained away all day,
leaving the kind-hearted Assunta, who loved him as if he were her own
child, to weep over his conduct and bewail his absence. Evening came,
and still, with all the patient solicitude of a mother, she watched for
his return.

“As the eleventh hour struck, he entered with a swaggering air,
attended by two of the most dissolute and reckless of his boon
companions. She stretched out her arms to him, but they seized hold of
her, and one of the three—none other than the accursed Benedetto
exclaimed:

“‘Put her to torture and she’ll soon tell us where her money is.’

“It unfortunately happened that our neighbor, Wasilio, was at Bastia,
leaving no person in his house but his wife; no human creature beside
could hear or see anything that took place within our dwelling. Two
held poor Assunta, who, unable to conceive that any harm was intended
to her, smiled in the face of those who were soon to become her
executioners. The third proceeded to barricade the doors and windows,
then returned, and the three united in stifling the cries of terror
incited by the sight of these preparations, and then dragged Assunta
feet foremost towards the brazier, expecting to wring from her an
avowal of where her supposed treasure was secreted. In the struggle her
clothes caught fire, and they were obliged to let go their hold in
order to preserve themselves from sharing the same fate. Covered with
flames, Assunta rushed wildly to the door, but it was fastened; she
flew to the windows, but they were also secured; then the neighbors
heard frightful shrieks; it was Assunta calling for help. The cries
died away in groans, and next morning, as soon as Wasilio’s wife could
muster up courage to venture abroad, she caused the door of our
dwelling to be opened by the public authorities, when Assunta, although
dreadfully burnt, was found still breathing; every drawer and closet in
the house had been forced open, and the money stolen. Benedetto never
again appeared at Rogliano, neither have I since that day either seen
or heard anything concerning him.

“It was subsequently to these dreadful events that I waited on your
excellency, to whom it would have been folly to have mentioned
Benedetto, since all trace of him seemed entirely lost; or of my
sister, since she was dead.”

“And in what light did you view the occurrence?” inquired Monte Cristo.

“As a punishment for the crime I had committed,” answered Bertuccio.
“Oh, those Villeforts are an accursed race!”

“Truly they are,” murmured the count in a lugubrious tone.

“And now,” resumed Bertuccio, “your excellency may, perhaps, be able to
comprehend that this place, which I revisit for the first time—this
garden, the actual scene of my crime—must have given rise to
reflections of no very agreeable nature, and produced that gloom and
depression of spirits which excited the notice of your excellency, who
was pleased to express a desire to know the cause. At this instant a
shudder passes over me as I reflect that possibly I am now standing on
the very grave in which lies M. de Villefort, by whose hand the ground
was dug to receive the corpse of his child.”

“Everything is possible,” said Monte Cristo, rising from the bench on
which he had been sitting; “even,” he added in an inaudible voice,
“even that the procureur be not dead. The Abbé Busoni did right to send
you to me,” he went on in his ordinary tone, “and you have done well in
relating to me the whole of your history, as it