phemy, Dorian!” he cried. “You must
not say things like that. They are horrible, and they don’t mean
anything.”

“You think so?” He laughed again.

“I know so. As for what I said to you to-night, I said it for your
good. You know I have been always a stanch friend to you.”

“Don’t touch me. Finish what you have to say.”

A twisted flash of pain shot across the painter’s face. He paused for a
moment, and a wild feeling of pity came over him. After all, what right
had he to pry into the life of Dorian Gray? If he had done a tithe of
what was rumoured about him, how much he must have suffered! Then he
straightened himself up, and walked over to the fire-place, and stood
there, looking at the burning logs with their frostlike ashes and their
throbbing cores of flame.

“I am waiting, Basil,” said the young man in a hard clear voice.

He turned round. “What I have to say is this,” he cried. “You must give
me some answer to these horrible charges that are made against you. If
you tell me that they are absolutely untrue from beginning to end, I
shall believe you. Deny them, Dorian, deny them! Can’t you see what I
am going through? My God! don’t tell me that you are bad, and corrupt,
and shameful.”

Dorian Gray smiled. There was a curl of contempt in his lips. “Come
upstairs, Basil,” he said quietly. “I keep a diary of my life from day
to day, and it never leaves the room in which it is written. I shall
show it to you if you come with me.”

“I shall come with you, Dorian, if you wish it. I see I have missed my
train. That makes no matter. I can go to-morrow. But don’t ask me to
read anything to-night. All I want is a plain answer to my question.”

“That shall be given to you upstairs. I could not give it here. You
will not have to read long.”




CHAPTER XIII.


He passed out of the room and began the ascent, Basil Hallward
following close behind. They walked softly, as men do instinctively at
night. The lamp cast fantastic shadows on the wall and staircase. A
rising wind made some of the windows rattle.

When they reached the top landing, Dorian set the lamp down on the
floor, and taking out the key, turned it in the lock. “You insist on
knowing, Basil?” he asked in a low voice.

“Yes.”

“I am delighted,” he answered, smiling. Then he added, somewhat
harshly, “You are the one man in the world who is entitled to know
everything about me. You have had more to do with my life than you
think”; and, taking up the lamp, he opened the door and went in. A cold
current of air passed them, and the light shot up for a moment in a
flame of murky orange. He shuddered. “Shut the door behind you,” he
whispered, as he placed the lamp on the table.

Hallward glanced round him with a puzzled expression. The room looked
as if it had not been lived in for years. A faded Flemish tapestry, a
curtained picture, an old Italian _cassone_, and an almost empty
book-case—that was all that it seemed to contain, besides a chair and a
table. As Dorian Gray was lighting a half-burned candle that was
standing on the mantelshelf, he saw that the whole place was covered
with dust and that the carpet was in holes. A mouse ran scuffling
behind the wainscoting. There was a damp odour of mildew.

“So you think that it is only God who sees the soul, Basil? Draw that
curtain back, and you will see mine.”

The voice that spoke was cold and cruel. “You are mad, Dorian, or
playing a part,” muttered Hallward, frowning.

“You won’t? Then I must do it myself,” said the young man, and he tore
the curtain from its rod and flung it on the ground.

An exclamation of horror broke from the painter’s lips as he saw in the
dim light the hideous face on the canvas grinning at him. There was
something in its expression that filled him with disgust and loathing.
Good heavens! it was Dorian Gray’s own face that he was looking at! The
horror, whatever it was, had not yet entirely spoiled that marvellous
bea