or the Interior, once a friend of mine.”

“How once?” stammered Debray; “what do you mean?”

“I say so, M. Debray, because I have no friends now, and I ought not to
have any. I thank you for having recognized me, sir.” Debray stepped
forward, and cordially pressed the hand of his interlocutor.

“Believe me, dear Albert,” he said, with all the emotion he was capable
of feeling,—“believe me, I feel deeply for your misfortunes, and if in
any way I can serve you, I am yours.”

“Thank you, sir,” said Albert, smiling. “In the midst of our
misfortunes, we are still rich enough not to require assistance from
anyone. We are leaving Paris, and when our journey is paid, we shall
have 5,000 francs left.”

The blood mounted to the temples of Debray, who held a million in his
pocket-book, and unimaginative as he was he could not help reflecting
that the same house had contained two women, one of whom, justly
dishonored, had left it poor with 1,500,000 francs under her cloak,
while the other, unjustly stricken, but sublime in her misfortune, was
yet rich with a few deniers. This parallel disturbed his usual
politeness, the philosophy he witnessed appalled him, he muttered a few
words of general civility and ran downstairs.

That day the minister’s clerks and the subordinates had a great deal to
put up with from his ill-humor. But that same night, he found himself
the possessor of a fine house, situated on the Boulevard de la
Madeleine, and an income of 50,000 livres.

The next day, just as Debray was signing the deed, that is about five
o’clock in the afternoon, Madame de Morcerf, after having
affectionately embraced her son, entered the _coupé_ of the diligence,
which closed upon her.

A man was hidden in Lafitte’s banking-house, behind one of the little
arched windows which are placed above each desk; he saw Mercédès enter
the diligence, and he also saw Albert withdraw. Then he passed his hand
across his forehead, which was clouded with doubt.

“Alas,” he exclaimed, “how can I restore the happiness I have taken
away from these poor innocent creatures? God help me!”



 Chapter 107. The Lions’ Den

One division of La Force, in which the most dangerous and desperate
prisoners are confined, is called the court of Saint-Bernard. The
prisoners, in their expressive language, have named it the “Lions’
Den,” probably because the captives possess teeth which frequently gnaw
the bars, and sometimes the keepers also. It is a prison within a
prison; the walls are double the thickness of the rest. The gratings
are every day carefully examined by jailers, whose herculean
proportions and cold pitiless expression prove them to have been chosen
to reign over their subjects for their superior activity and
intelligence.

The courtyard of this quarter is enclosed by enormous walls, over which
the sun glances obliquely, when it deigns to penetrate into this gulf
of moral and physical deformity. On this paved yard are to be
seen,—pacing to and fro from morning till night, pale, careworn, and
haggard, like so many shadows,—the men whom justice holds beneath the
steel she is sharpening. There, crouched against the side of the wall
which attracts and retains the most heat, they may be seen sometimes
talking to one another, but more frequently alone, watching the door,
which sometimes opens to call forth one from the gloomy assemblage, or
to throw in another outcast from society.

The court of Saint-Bernard has its own particular apartment for the
reception of guests; it is a long rectangle, divided by two upright
gratings placed at a distance of three feet from one another to prevent
a visitor from shaking hands with or passing anything to the prisoners.
It is a wretched, damp, nay, even horrible spot, more especially when
we consider the agonizing conferences which have taken place between
those iron bars. And yet, frightful though this spot may be, it is
looked upon as a kind of paradis