dly in another man’s house without any sense
of shame.”

Thus did they converse; meanwhile Melanthius the goatherd came up, for
he too was bringing in his best goats for the suitors’ dinner; and he
had two shepherds with him. They tied the goats up under the gatehouse,
and then Melanthius began gibing at Ulysses. “Are you still here,
stranger,” said he, “to pester people by begging about the house? Why
can you not go elsewhere? You and I shall not come to an understanding
before we have given each other a taste of our fists. You beg without
any sense of decency: are there not feasts elsewhere among the
Achaeans, as well as here?”

Ulysses made no answer, but bowed his head and brooded. Then a third
man, Philoetius, joined them, who was bringing in a barren heifer and
some goats. These were brought over by the boatmen who are there to
take people over when any one comes to them. So Philoetius made his
heifer and his goats secure under the gatehouse, and then went up to
the swineherd. “Who, Swineherd,” said he, “is this stranger that is
lately come here? Is he one of your men? What is his family? Where does
he come from? Poor fellow, he looks as if he had been some great man,
but the gods give sorrow to whom they will—even to kings if it so
pleases them.”

As he spoke he went up to Ulysses and saluted him with his right hand;
“Good day to you, father stranger,” said he, “you seem to be very
poorly off now, but I hope you will have better times by and by. Father
Jove, of all gods you are the most malicious. We are your own children,
yet you show us no mercy in all our misery and afflictions. A sweat
came over me when I saw this man, and my eyes filled with tears, for he
reminds me of Ulysses, who I fear is going about in just such rags as
this man’s are, if indeed he is still among the living. If he is
already dead and in the house of Hades, then, alas! for my good master,
who made me his stockman when I was quite young among the
Cephallenians, and now his cattle are countless; no one could have done
better with them than I have, for they have bred like ears of corn;
nevertheless I have to keep bringing them in for others to eat, who
take no heed to his son though he is in the house, and fear not the
wrath of heaven, but are already eager to divide Ulysses’ property
among them because he has been away so long. I have often thought—only
it would not be right while his son is living—of going off with the
cattle to some foreign country; bad as this would be, it is still
harder to stay here and be ill-treated about other people’s herds. My
position is intolerable, and I should long since have run away and put
myself under the protection of some other chief, only that I believe my
poor master will yet return, and send all these suitors flying out of
the house.”

“Stockman,” answered Ulysses, “you seem to be a very well-disposed
person, and I can see that you are a man of sense. Therefore I will
tell you, and will confirm my words with an oath. By Jove, the chief of
all gods, and by that hearth of Ulysses to which I am now come, Ulysses
shall return before you leave this place, and if you are so minded you
shall see him killing the suitors who are now masters here.”

“If Jove were to bring this to pass,” replied the stockman, “you should
see how I would do my very utmost to help him.”

And in like manner Eumaeus prayed that Ulysses might return home.

Thus did they converse. Meanwhile the suitors were hatching a plot to
murder Telemachus: but a bird flew near them on their left hand—an
eagle with a dove in its talons. On this Amphinomus said, “My friends,
this plot of ours to murder Telemachus will not succeed; let us go to
dinner instead.”

The others assented, so they went inside and laid their cloaks on the
benches and seats. They sacrificed the sheep, goats, pigs, and the
heifer, and when the inward meats were cooked they served them round.
They mixed the wine in 