ng man espoused was one so
sacred that Beauchamp had only to comply with all his wishes; he
yielded and contented himself with following Morcerf. Albert sprang
from the porter’s lodge to the steps. He was received by Baptistin. The
count had, indeed, just arrived, but he was in his bath, and had
forbidden that anyone should be admitted.

“But after his bath?” asked Morcerf.

“My master will go to dinner.”

“And after dinner?”

“He will sleep an hour.”

“Then?”

“He is going to the Opera.”

“Are you sure of it?” asked Albert.

“Quite, sir; my master has ordered his horses at eight o’clock
precisely.”

“Very good,” replied Albert; “that is all I wished to know.”

Then, turning towards Beauchamp, “If you have anything to attend to,
Beauchamp, do it directly; if you have any appointment for this
evening, defer it till tomorrow. I depend on you to accompany me to the
Opera; and if you can, bring Château-Renaud with you.”

Beauchamp availed himself of Albert’s permission, and left him,
promising to call for him at a quarter before eight. On his return
home, Albert expressed his wish to Franz Debray, and Morrel, to see
them at the Opera that evening. Then he went to see his mother, who
since the events of the day before had refused to see anyone, and had
kept her room. He found her in bed, overwhelmed with grief at this
public humiliation.

The sight of Albert produced the effect which might naturally be
expected on Mercédès; she pressed her son’s hand and sobbed aloud, but
her tears relieved her. Albert stood one moment speechless by the side
of his mother’s bed. It was evident from his pale face and knit brows
that his resolution to revenge himself was growing weaker.

“My dear mother,” said he, “do you know if M. de Morcerf has any
enemy?”

Mercédès started; she noticed that the young man did not say “my
father.”

“My son,” she said, “persons in the count’s situation have many secret
enemies. Those who are known are not the most dangerous.”

“I know it, and appeal to your penetration. You are of so superior a
mind, nothing escapes you.”

“Why do you say so?”

“Because, for instance, you noticed on the evening of the ball we gave,
that M. de Monte Cristo would eat nothing in our house.”

Mercédès raised herself on her feverish arm.

“M. de Monte Cristo!” she exclaimed; “and how is he connected with the
question you asked me?”

40219m



“You know, mother, M. de Monte Cristo is almost an Oriental, and it is
customary with the Orientals to secure full liberty for revenge by not
eating or drinking in the houses of their enemies.”

“Do you say M. de Monte Cristo is our enemy?” replied Mercédès,
becoming paler than the sheet which covered her. “Who told you so? Why,
you are mad, Albert! M. de Monte Cristo has only shown us kindness. M.
de Monte Cristo saved your life; you yourself presented him to us. Oh,
I entreat you, my son, if you had entertained such an idea, dispel it;
and my counsel to you—nay, my prayer—is to retain his friendship.”

“Mother,” replied the young man, “you have special reasons for telling
me to conciliate that man.”

“I?” said Mercédès, blushing as rapidly as she had turned pale, and
again becoming paler than ever.

“Yes, doubtless; and is it not that he may never do us any harm?”

Mercédès shuddered, and, fixing on her son a scrutinizing gaze, “You
speak strangely,” said she to Albert, “and you appear to have some
singular prejudices. What has the count done? Three days since you were
with him in Normandy; only three days since we looked on him as our
best friend.”

An ironical smile passed over Albert’s lips. Mercédès saw it and with
the double instinct of woman and mother guessed all; but as she was
prudent and strong-minded she concealed both her sorrows and her fears.
Albert was silent; an instant after, the countess resumed:

“You came to inquire after my health; I will candidly acknowledge that
I am not wel