eing
slender he had now become meagre; once pale, he was now yellow; his
deep-set eyes were hollow, and the gold spectacles shielding his eyes
seemed to be an integral portion of his face. He dressed entirely in
black, with the exception of his white tie, and his funeral appearance
was only mitigated by the slight line of red ribbon which passed almost
imperceptibly through his button-hole, and appeared like a streak of
blood traced with a delicate brush.

Although master of himself, Monte Cristo, scrutinized with
irrepressible curiosity the magistrate whose salute he returned, and
who, distrustful by habit, and especially incredulous as to social
prodigies, was much more despised to look upon “the noble stranger,” as
Monte Cristo was already called, as an adventurer in search of new
fields, or an escaped criminal, rather than as a prince of the Holy
See, or a sultan of the _Thousand and One Nights_.

“Sir,” said Villefort, in the squeaky tone assumed by magistrates in
their oratorical periods, and of which they cannot, or will not, divest
themselves in society, “sir, the signal service which you yesterday
rendered to my wife and son has made it a duty for me to offer you my
thanks. I have come, therefore, to discharge this duty, and to express
to you my overwhelming gratitude.”

And as he said this, the “eye severe” of the magistrate had lost
nothing of its habitual arrogance. He spoke in a voice of the
procureur-general, with the rigid inflexibility of neck and shoulders
which caused his flatterers to say (as we have before observed) that he
was the living statue of the law.

“Monsieur,” replied the count, with a chilling air, “I am very happy to
have been the means of preserving a son to his mother, for they say
that the sentiment of maternity is the most holy of all; and the good
fortune which occurred to me, monsieur, might have enabled you to
dispense with a duty which, in its discharge, confers an undoubtedly
great honor; for I am aware that M. de Villefort is not usually lavish
of the favor which he now bestows on me,—a favor which, however
estimable, is unequal to the satisfaction which I have in my own
consciousness.”

Villefort, astonished at this reply, which he by no means expected,
started like a soldier who feels the blow levelled at him over the
armor he wears, and a curl of his disdainful lip indicated that from
that moment he noted in the tablets of his brain that the Count of
Monte Cristo was by no means a highly bred gentleman.

He glanced around, in order to seize on something on which the
conversation might turn, and seemed to fall easily on a topic. He saw
the map which Monte Cristo had been examining when he entered, and
said:

“You seem geographically engaged, sir? It is a rich study for you, who,
as I learn, have seen as many lands as are delineated on this map.”

“Yes, sir,” replied the count; “I have sought to make of the human
race, taken in the mass, what you practice every day on individuals—a
physiological study. I have believed it was much easier to descend from
the whole to a part than to ascend from a part to the whole. It is an
algebraic axiom, which makes us proceed from a known to an unknown
quantity, and not from an unknown to a known; but sit down, sir, I beg
of you.”

Monte Cristo pointed to a chair, which the procureur was obliged to
take the trouble to move forwards himself, while the count merely fell
back into his own, on which he had been kneeling when M. Villefort
entered. Thus the count was halfway turned towards his visitor, having
his back towards the window, his elbow resting on the geographical
chart which furnished the theme of conversation for the moment,—a
conversation which assumed, as in the case of the interviews with
Danglars and Morcerf, a turn analogous to the persons, if not to the
situation.

“Ah, you philosophize,” replied Villefort, after a moment’s silence,
during which, like a wrestler who