ow what blood
is.”

“We do,” said the bullocks. “It is red stuff that soaks into the ground
and smells.”

The troop-horse gave a kick and a bound and a snort.

“Don’t talk of it,” he said. “I can smell it now, just thinking of it.
It makes me want to run--when I haven’t Dick on my back.”

“But it is not here,” said the camel and the bullocks. “Why are you so
stupid?”

“It’s vile stuff,” said Billy. “I don’t want to run, but I don’t want to
talk about it.”

“There you are!” said Two Tails, waving his tail to explain.

“Surely. Yes, we have been here all night,” said the bullocks.

Two Tails stamped his foot till the iron ring on it jingled. “Oh, I’m
not talking to you. You can’t see inside your heads.”

“No. We see out of our four eyes,” said the bullocks. “We see straight
in front of us.”

“If I could do that and nothing else, you wouldn’t be needed to pull the
big guns at all. If I was like my captain--he can see things inside his
head before the firing begins, and he shakes all over, but he knows too
much to run away--if I was like him I could pull the guns. But if I were
as wise as all that I should never be here. I should be a king in the
forest, as I used to be, sleeping half the day and bathing when I liked.
I haven’t had a good bath for a month.”

“That’s all very fine,” said Billy. “But giving a thing a long name
doesn’t make it any better.”

“H’sh!” said the troop horse. “I think I understand what Two Tails
means.”

“You’ll understand better in a minute,” said Two Tails angrily. “Now you
just explain to me why you don’t like this!”

He began trumpeting furiously at the top of his trumpet.

“Stop that!” said Billy and the troop horse together, and I could
hear them stamp and shiver. An elephant’s trumpeting is always nasty,
especially on a dark night.

“I shan’t stop,” said Two Tails. “Won’t you explain that, please?
Hhrrmph! Rrrt! Rrrmph! Rrrhha!” Then he stopped suddenly, and I heard
a little whimper in the dark, and knew that Vixen had found me at last.
She knew as well as I did that if there is one thing in the world the
elephant is more afraid of than another it is a little barking dog. So
she stopped to bully Two Tails in his pickets, and yapped round his big
feet. Two Tails shuffled and squeaked. “Go away, little dog!” he said.
“Don’t snuff at my ankles, or I’ll kick at you. Good little dog--nice
little doggie, then! Go home, you yelping little beast! Oh, why doesn’t
someone take her away? She’ll bite me in a minute.”

“Seems to me,” said Billy to the troop horse, “that our friend Two Tails
is afraid of most things. Now, if I had a full meal for every dog I’ve
kicked across the parade-ground I should be as fat as Two Tails nearly.”

I whistled, and Vixen ran up to me, muddy all over, and licked my nose,
and told me a long tale about hunting for me all through the camp. I
never let her know that I understood beast talk, or she would have
taken all sorts of liberties. So I buttoned her into the breast of my
overcoat, and Two Tails shuffled and stamped and growled to himself.

“Extraordinary! Most extraordinary!” he said. “It runs in our family.
Now, where has that nasty little beast gone to?”

I heard him feeling about with his trunk.

“We all seem to be affected in various ways,” he went on, blowing his
nose. “Now, you gentlemen were alarmed, I believe, when I trumpeted.”

“Not alarmed, exactly,” said the troop-horse, “but it made me feel as
though I had hornets where my saddle ought to be. Don’t begin again.”

“I’m frightened of a little dog, and the camel here is frightened by bad
dreams in the night.”

“It is very lucky for us that we haven’t all got to fight in the same
way,” said the troop-horse.

“What I want to know,” said the young mule, who had been quiet for a
long time--“what I want to know is, why we have to fight at all.”

“Because we’re told to,” said the troop-horse, with a snort of contempt.

“Orders,” sai