accompanied by her
daughter, entered, escorted by Lucien Debray, who assiduously conducted
them to their seats.

“Ha, ha,” said Château-Renaud, “here come some friends of yours,
viscount! What are you looking at there? don’t you see they are trying
to catch your eye?”

Albert turned round, just in time to receive a gracious wave of the fan
from the baroness; as for Mademoiselle Eugénie, she scarcely vouchsafed
to waste the glances of her large black eyes even upon the business of
the stage.

“I tell you what, my dear fellow,” said Château-Renaud, “I cannot
imagine what objection you can possibly have to Mademoiselle
Danglars—that is, setting aside her want of ancestry and somewhat
inferior rank, which by the way I don’t think you care very much about.
Now, barring all that, I mean to say she is a deuced fine girl!”

“Handsome, certainly,” replied Albert, “but not to my taste, which I
confess, inclines to something softer, gentler, and more feminine.”

“Ah, well,” exclaimed Château-Renaud, who because he had seen his
thirtieth summer fancied himself duly warranted in assuming a sort of
paternal air with his more youthful friend, “you young people are never
satisfied; why, what would you have more? your parents have chosen you
a bride built on the model of Diana, the huntress, and yet you are not
content.”

“No, for that very resemblance affrights me; I should have liked
something more in the manner of the Venus of Milo or Capua; but this
chase-loving Diana, continually surrounded by her nymphs, gives me a
sort of alarm lest she should some day bring on me the fate of Actæon.”

And, indeed, it required but one glance at Mademoiselle Danglars to
comprehend the justness of Morcerf’s remark. She was beautiful, but her
beauty was of too marked and decided a character to please a fastidious
taste; her hair was raven black, but its natural waves seemed somewhat
rebellious; her eyes, of the same color as her hair, were surmounted by
well-arched brows, whose great defect, however, consisted in an almost
habitual frown, while her whole physiognomy wore that expression of
firmness and decision so little in accordance with the gentler
attributes of her sex—her nose was precisely what a sculptor would have
chosen for a chiselled Juno. Her mouth, which might have been found
fault with as too large, displayed teeth of pearly whiteness, rendered
still more conspicuous by the brilliant carmine of her lips,
contrasting vividly with her naturally pale complexion. But that which
completed the almost masculine look Morcerf found so little to his
taste, was a dark mole, of much larger dimensions than these freaks of
nature generally are, placed just at the corner of her mouth; and the
effect tended to increase the expression of self-dependence that
characterized her countenance.

The rest of Mademoiselle Eugénie’s person was in perfect keeping with
the head just described; she, indeed, reminded one of Diana, as
Château-Renaud observed, but her bearing was more haughty and resolute.

As regarded her attainments, the only fault to be found with them was
the same that a fastidious connoisseur might have found with her
beauty, that they were somewhat too erudite and masculine for so young
a person. She was a perfect linguist, a first-rate artist, wrote
poetry, and composed music; to the study of the latter she professed to
be entirely devoted, following it with an indefatigable perseverance,
assisted by a schoolfellow,—a young woman without fortune whose talent
promised to develop into remarkable powers as a singer. It was rumored
that she was an object of almost paternal interest to one of the
principal composers of the day, who excited her to spare no pains in
the cultivation of her voice, which might hereafter prove a source of
wealth and independence. But this counsel effectually decided
Mademoiselle Danglars never to commit herself by being seen in public
with one destined for a 