e by the men whose days are numbered;
it is so rare for them to leave the Lions’ Den for any other place than
the barrier Saint-Jacques, the galleys! or solitary confinement.

In the court which we have attempted to describe, and from which a damp
vapor was rising, a young man with his hands in his pockets, who had
excited much curiosity among the inhabitants of the “Den,” might be
seen walking. The cut of his clothes would have made him pass for an
elegant man, if those clothes had not been torn to shreds; still they
did not show signs of wear, and the fine cloth, beneath the careful
hands of the prisoner, soon recovered its gloss in the parts which were
still perfect, for the wearer tried his best to make it assume the
appearance of a new coat. He bestowed the same attention upon the
cambric front of a shirt, which had considerably changed in color since
his entrance into the prison, and he polished his varnished boots with
the corner of a handkerchief embroidered with initials surmounted by a
coronet.

Some of the inmates of the “Lions’ Den” were watching the operations of
the prisoner’s toilet with considerable interest.

“See, the prince is pluming himself,” said one of the thieves.

“He’s a fine looking fellow,” said another; “if he had only a comb and
hair-grease, he’d take the shine off the gentlemen in white kids.”

“His coat looks nearly new, and his boots are brilliant. It is pleasant
to have such well-dressed brethren; and those gendarmes behaved
shamefully. What jealousy; to tear such clothes!”

“He looks like a big-bug,” said another; “dresses in fine style. And,
then, to be here so young! Oh, what larks!”

Meanwhile the object of this hideous admiration approached the wicket,
against which one of the keepers was leaning.

“Come, sir,” he said, “lend me twenty francs; you will soon be paid;
you run no risks with me. Remember, I have relations who possess more
millions than you have deniers. Come, I beseech you, lend me twenty
francs, so that I may buy a dressing-gown; it is intolerable always to
be in a coat and boots! And what a coat, sir, for a prince of the
Cavalcanti!”

The keeper turned his back, and shrugged his shoulders; he did not even
laugh at what would have caused anyone else to do so; he had heard so
many utter the same things,—indeed, he heard nothing else.

“Come,” said Andrea, “you are a man void of compassion; I’ll have you
turned out.”

This made the keeper turn around, and he burst into a loud laugh. The
prisoners then approached and formed a circle.

“I tell you that with that wretched sum,” continued Andrea, “I could
obtain a coat, and a room in which to receive the illustrious visitor I
am daily expecting.”

“Of course—of course,” said the prisoners;—“anyone can see he’s a
gentleman!”

“Well, then, lend him the twenty francs,” said the keeper, leaning on
the other shoulder; “surely you will not refuse a comrade!”

50151m



“I am no comrade of these people,” said the young man, proudly, “you
have no right to insult me thus.”

The thieves looked at one another with low murmurs, and a storm
gathered over the head of the aristocratic prisoner, raised less by his
own words than by the manner of the keeper. The latter, sure of
quelling the tempest when the waves became too violent, allowed them to
rise to a certain pitch that he might be revenged on the importunate
Andrea, and besides it would afford him some recreation during the long
day.

The thieves had already approached Andrea, some screaming, _“La
savate—La savate!”_26 a cruel operation, which consists in cuffing a
comrade who may have fallen into disgrace, not with an old shoe, but
with an iron-heeled one. Others proposed the _anguille_, another kind
of recreation, in which a handkerchief is filled with sand, pebbles,
and two-sous pieces, when they have them, which the wretches beat like
a flail over the head and shoulders of the unhappy sufferer.

“Let 