utside if you want to cry, and leave the bow behind you. We suitors
shall have to contend for it with might and main, for we shall find it
no light matter to string such a bow as this is. There is not a man of
us all who is such another as Ulysses; for I have seen him and remember
him, though I was then only a child.”

This was what he said, but all the time he was expecting to be able to
string the bow and shoot through the iron, whereas in fact he was to be
the first that should taste of the arrows from the hands of Ulysses,
whom he was dishonouring in his own house—egging the others on to do so
also.

Then Telemachus spoke. “Great heavens!” he exclaimed, “Jove must have
robbed me of my senses. Here is my dear and excellent mother saying she
will quit this house and marry again, yet I am laughing and enjoying
myself as though there were nothing happening. But, suitors, as the
contest has been agreed upon, let it go forward. It is for a woman
whose peer is not to be found in Pylos, Argos, or Mycene, nor yet in
Ithaca nor on the mainland. You know this as well as I do; what need
have I to speak in praise of my mother? Come on, then, make no excuses
for delay, but let us see whether you can string the bow or no. I too
will make trial of it, for if I can string it and shoot through the
iron, I shall not suffer my mother to quit this house with a stranger,
not if I can win the prizes which my father won before me.”

As he spoke he sprang from his seat, threw his crimson cloak from him,
and took his sword from his shoulder. First he set the axes in a row,
in a long groove which he had dug for them, and had made straight by
line.162 Then he stamped the earth tight round them, and everyone was
surprised when they saw him set them up so orderly, though he had never
seen anything of the kind before. This done, he went on to the pavement
to make trial of the bow; thrice did he tug at it, trying with all his
might to draw the string, and thrice he had to leave off, though he had
hoped to string the bow and shoot through the iron. He was trying for
the fourth time, and would have strung it had not Ulysses made a sign
to check him in spite of all his eagerness. So he said:

“Alas! I shall either be always feeble and of no prowess, or I am too
young, and have not yet reached my full strength so as to be able to
hold my own if any one attacks me. You others, therefore, who are
stronger than I, make trial of the bow and get this contest settled.”

On this he put the bow down, letting it lean against the door [that led
into the house] with the arrow standing against the top of the bow.
Then he sat down on the seat from which he had risen, and Antinous
said:

“Come on each of you in his turn, going towards the right from the
place at which the cupbearer begins when he is handing round the wine.”

The rest agreed, and Leiodes son of Oenops was the first to rise. He
was sacrificial priest to the suitors, and sat in the corner near the
mixing-bowl. 163 He was the only man who hated their evil deeds and was
indignant with the others. He was now the first to take the bow and
arrow, so he went on to the pavement to make his trial, but he could
not string the bow, for his hands were weak and unused to hard work,
they therefore soon grew tired, and he said to the suitors, “My
friends, I cannot string it; let another have it, this bow shall take
the life and soul out of many a chief among us, for it is better to die
than to live after having missed the prize that we have so long striven
for, and which has brought us so long together. Some one of us is even
now hoping and praying that he may marry Penelope, but when he has seen
this bow and tried it, let him woo and make bridal offerings to some
other woman, and let Penelope marry whoever makes her the best offer
and whose lot it is to win her.”

On this he put the bow down, letting it lean against the door,164 with
the arrow standing ag