r two nights; but
then look at my desk; see what I have written during these two days and
nights. I have filled those papers, and have made out the accusation
against the assassin Benedetto. Oh, work, work,—my passion, my joy, my
delight,—it is for thee to alleviate my sorrows!” and he convulsively
grasped the hand of d’Avrigny.

“Do you require my services now?” asked d’Avrigny.

“No,” said Villefort; “only return again at eleven o’clock; at twelve
the—the—oh, Heavens, my poor, poor child!” and the procureur again
becoming a man, lifted up his eyes and groaned.

“Shall you be present in the reception-room?”

“No; I have a cousin who has undertaken this sad office. I shall work,
doctor—when I work I forget everything.”

And, indeed, no sooner had the doctor left the room, than he was again
absorbed in work. On the doorsteps d’Avrigny met the cousin whom
Villefort had mentioned, a personage as insignificant in our story as
in the world he occupied—one of those beings designed from their birth
to make themselves useful to others. He was punctual, dressed in black,
with crape around his hat, and presented himself at his cousin’s with a
face made up for the occasion, and which he could alter as might be
required.

At eleven o’clock the mourning-coaches rolled into the paved court, and
the Rue du Faubourg Saint-Honoré was filled with a crowd of idlers,
equally pleased to witness the festivities or the mourning of the rich,
and who rush with the same avidity to a funeral procession as to the
marriage of a duchess.

Gradually the reception-room filled, and some of our old friends made
their appearance—we mean Debray, Château-Renaud, and Beauchamp,
accompanied by all the leading men of the day at the bar, in
literature, or the army, for M. de Villefort moved in the first
Parisian circles, less owing to his social position than to his
personal merit.

The cousin standing at the door ushered in the guests, and it was
rather a relief to the indifferent to see a person as unmoved as
themselves, and who did not exact a mournful face or force tears, as
would have been the case with a father, a brother, or a lover. Those
who were acquainted soon formed into little groups. One of them was
made of Debray, Château-Renaud, and Beauchamp.

“Poor girl,” said Debray, like the rest, paying an involuntary tribute
to the sad event,—“poor girl, so young, so rich, so beautiful! Could
you have imagined this scene, Château-Renaud, when we saw her, at the
most three weeks ago, about to sign that contract?”

“Indeed, no,” said Château-Renaud.”

“Did you know her?”

“I spoke to her once or twice at Madame de Morcerf’s, among the rest;
she appeared to me charming, though rather melancholy. Where is her
stepmother? Do you know?”

“She is spending the day with the wife of the worthy gentleman who is
receiving us.”

50105m



“Who is he?”

“Whom do you mean?”

“The gentleman who receives us? Is he a deputy?”

“Oh, no. I am condemned to witness those gentlemen every day,” said
Beauchamp; “but he is perfectly unknown to me.”

“Have you mentioned this death in your paper?”

“It has been mentioned, but the article is not mine; indeed, I doubt if
it will please M. Villefort, for it says that if four successive deaths
had happened anywhere else than in the house of the king’s attorney, he
would have interested himself somewhat more about it.”

“Still,” said Château-Renaud, “Dr. d’Avrigny, who attends my mother,
declares he is in despair about it. But whom are you seeking, Debray?”

“I am seeking the Count of Monte Cristo” said the young man.

“I met him on the boulevard, on my way here,” said Beauchamp. “I think
he is about to leave Paris; he was going to his banker.”

“His banker? Danglars is his banker, is he not?” asked Château-Renaud
of Debray.

“I believe so,” replied the secretary with slight uneasiness. “But
Monte Cristo is not the only one I miss here; I do not see M