ember, M. Morrel asked his daughter for the key of his
study. Julie trembled at this request, which seemed to her of bad omen.
Why did her father ask for this key which she always kept, and which
was only taken from her in childhood as a punishment? The young girl
looked at Morrel.

“What have I done wrong, father,” she said, “that you should take this
key from me?”

“Nothing, my dear,” replied the unhappy man, the tears starting to his
eyes at this simple question,—“nothing, only I want it.”

Julie made a pretence to feel for the key. “I must have left it in my
room,” she said.

And she went out, but instead of going to her apartment she hastened to
consult Emmanuel.

“Do not give this key to your father,” said he, “and tomorrow morning,
if possible, do not quit him for a moment.”

She questioned Emmanuel, but he knew nothing, or would not say what he
knew.

During the night, between the 4th and 5th of September, Madame Morrel
remained listening for every sound, and, until three o’clock in the
morning, she heard her husband pacing the room in great agitation. It
was three o’clock when he threw himself on the bed. The mother and
daughter passed the night together. They had expected Maximilian since
the previous evening. At eight o’clock in the morning Morrel entered
their chamber. He was calm; but the agitation of the night was legible
in his pale and careworn visage. They did not dare to ask him how he
had slept. Morrel was kinder to his wife, more affectionate to his
daughter, than he had ever been. He could not cease gazing at and
kissing the sweet girl. Julie, mindful of Emmanuel’s request, was
following her father when he quitted the room, but he said to her
quickly:

“Remain with your mother, dearest.” Julie wished to accompany him. “I
wish you to do so,” said he.

This was the first time Morrel had ever so spoken, but he said it in a
tone of paternal kindness, and Julie did not dare to disobey. She
remained at the same spot standing mute and motionless. An instant
afterwards the door opened, she felt two arms encircle her, and a mouth
pressed her forehead. She looked up and uttered an exclamation of joy.

20053m



“Maximilian, my dearest brother!” she cried.

At these words Madame Morrel rose, and threw herself into her son’s
arms.

“Mother,” said the young man, looking alternately at Madame Morrel and
her daughter, “what has occurred—what has happened? Your letter has
frightened me, and I have come hither with all speed.”

“Julie,” said Madame Morrel, making a sign to the young man, “go and
tell your father that Maximilian has just arrived.”

The young lady rushed out of the apartment, but on the first step of
the staircase she found a man holding a letter in his hand.

“Are you not Mademoiselle Julie Morrel?” inquired the man, with a
strong Italian accent.

“Yes, sir,” replied Julie with hesitation; “what is your pleasure? I do
not know you.”

“Read this letter,” he said, handing it to her. Julie hesitated. “It
concerns the best interests of your father,” said the messenger.

The young girl hastily took the letter from him. She opened it quickly
and read:

“Go this moment to the Allées de Meilhan, enter the house No. 15, ask
the porter for the key of the room on the fifth floor, enter the
apartment, take from the corner of the mantelpiece a purse netted in
red silk, and give it to your father. It is important that he should
receive it before eleven o’clock. You promised to obey me implicitly.
Remember your oath.

“Sinbad the Sailor.”

The young girl uttered a joyful cry, raised her eyes, looked round to
question the messenger, but he had disappeared. She cast her eyes again
over the note to peruse it a second time, and saw there was a
postscript. She read:

“It is important that you should fulfil this mission in person and
alone. If you go accompanied by any other person, or should anyone else
go in your place, the porter wi