change places
with you, Dorian. The world has cried out against us both, but it has
always worshipped you. It always will worship you. You are the type of
what the age is searching for, and what it is afraid it has found. I am
so glad that you have never done anything, never carved a statue, or
painted a picture, or produced anything outside of yourself! Life has
been your art. You have set yourself to music. Your days are your
sonnets.”

Dorian rose up from the piano and passed his hand through his hair.
“Yes, life has been exquisite,” he murmured, “but I am not going to
have the same life, Harry. And you must not say these extravagant
things to me. You don’t know everything about me. I think that if you
did, even you would turn from me. You laugh. Don’t laugh.”

“Why have you stopped playing, Dorian? Go back and give me the nocturne
over again. Look at that great, honey-coloured moon that hangs in the
dusky air. She is waiting for you to charm her, and if you play she
will come closer to the earth. You won’t? Let us go to the club, then.
It has been a charming evening, and we must end it charmingly. There is
some one at White’s who wants immensely to know you—young Lord Poole,
Bournemouth’s eldest son. He has already copied your neckties, and has
begged me to introduce him to you. He is quite delightful and rather
reminds me of you.”

“I hope not,” said Dorian with a sad look in his eyes. “But I am tired
to-night, Harry. I shan’t go to the club. It is nearly eleven, and I
want to go to bed early.”

“Do stay. You have never played so well as to-night. There was
something in your touch that was wonderful. It had more expression than
I had ever heard from it before.”

“It is because I am going to be good,” he answered, smiling. “I am a
little changed already.”

“You cannot change to me, Dorian,” said Lord Henry. “You and I will
always be friends.”

“Yet you poisoned me with a book once. I should not forgive that.
Harry, promise me that you will never lend that book to any one. It
does harm.”

“My dear boy, you are really beginning to moralize. You will soon be
going about like the converted, and the revivalist, warning people
against all the sins of which you have grown tired. You are much too
delightful to do that. Besides, it is no use. You and I are what we
are, and will be what we will be. As for being poisoned by a book,
there is no such thing as that. Art has no influence upon action. It
annihilates the desire to act. It is superbly sterile. The books that
the world calls immoral are books that show the world its own shame.
That is all. But we won’t discuss literature. Come round to-morrow. I
am going to ride at eleven. We might go together, and I will take you
to lunch afterwards with Lady Branksome. She is a charming woman, and
wants to consult you about some tapestries she is thinking of buying.
Mind you come. Or shall we lunch with our little duchess? She says she
never sees you now. Perhaps you are tired of Gladys? I thought you
would be. Her clever tongue gets on one’s nerves. Well, in any case, be
here at eleven.”

“Must I really come, Harry?”

“Certainly. The park is quite lovely now. I don’t think there have been
such lilacs since the year I met you.”

“Very well. I shall be here at eleven,” said Dorian. “Good night,
Harry.” As he reached the door, he hesitated for a moment, as if he had
something more to say. Then he sighed and went out.




CHAPTER XX.


It was a lovely night, so warm that he threw his coat over his arm and
did not even put his silk scarf round his throat. As he strolled home,
smoking his cigarette, two young men in evening dress passed him. He
heard one of them whisper to the other, “That is Dorian Gray.” He
remembered how pleased he used to be when he was pointed out, or stared
at, or talked about. He was tired of hearing his own name now. Half the
charm of the little village where he had been so often lately was