 promised a wedding gift of a hundred and fifty
thousand livres. It was agreed that the three millions should be
intrusted to Danglars to invest; some persons had warned the young man
of the circumstances of his future father-in-law, who had of late
sustained repeated losses; but with sublime disinterestedness and
confidence the young man refused to listen, or to express a single
doubt to the baron.

The baron adored Count Andrea Cavalcanti; not so Mademoiselle Eugénie
Danglars. With an instinctive hatred of matrimony, she suffered
Andrea’s attentions in order to get rid of Morcerf; but when Andrea
urged his suit, she betrayed an entire dislike to him. The baron might
possibly have perceived it, but, attributing it to a caprice, feigned
ignorance.

The delay demanded by Beauchamp had nearly expired. Morcerf appreciated
the advice of Monte Cristo to let things die away of their own accord.
No one had taken up the remark about the general, and no one had
recognized in the officer who betrayed the castle of Yanina the noble
count in the House of Peers.

Albert, however, felt no less insulted; the few lines which had
irritated him were certainly intended as an insult. Besides, the manner
in which Beauchamp had closed the conference left a bitter recollection
in his heart. He cherished the thought of the duel, hoping to conceal
its true cause even from his seconds. Beauchamp had not been seen since
the day he visited Albert, and those of whom the latter inquired always
told him he was out on a journey which would detain him some days.
Where he was no one knew.

One morning Albert was awakened by his valet de chambre, who announced
Beauchamp. Albert rubbed his eyes, ordered his servant to introduce him
into the small smoking-room on the ground floor, dressed himself
quickly, and went down.

He found Beauchamp pacing the room; on perceiving him Beauchamp
stopped.

“Your arrival here, without waiting my visit at your house today, looks
well, sir,” said Albert. “Tell me, may I shake hands with you, saying,
‘Beauchamp, acknowledge you have injured me, and retain my friendship,’
or must I simply propose to you a choice of arms?”

“Albert,” said Beauchamp, with a look of sorrow which stupefied the
young man, “let us first sit down and talk.”

“Rather, sir, before we sit down, I must demand your answer.”

“Albert,” said the journalist, “these are questions which it is
difficult to answer.”

“I will facilitate it by repeating the question, ‘Will you, or will you
not, retract?’”

“Morcerf, it is not enough to answer ‘yes’ or ‘no’ to questions which
concern the honor, the social interest, and the life of such a man as
Lieutenant-général the Count of Morcerf, peer of France.”

“What must then be done?”

40174m



“What I have done, Albert. I reasoned thus—money, time, and fatigue are
nothing compared with the reputation and interests of a whole family;
probabilities will not suffice, only facts will justify a deadly combat
with a friend. If I strike with the sword, or discharge the contents of
a pistol at man with whom, for three years, I have been on terms of
intimacy, I must, at least, know why I do so; I must meet him with a
heart at ease, and that quiet conscience which a man needs when his own
arm must save his life.”

“Well,” said Morcerf, impatiently, “what does all this mean?”

“It means that I have just returned from Yanina.”

“From Yanina?”

“Yes.”

“Impossible!”

“Here is my passport; examine the visa—Geneva, Milan, Venice, Trieste,
Delvino, Yanina. Will you believe the government of a republic, a
kingdom, and an empire?” Albert cast his eyes on the passport, then
raised them in astonishment to Beauchamp.

“You have been to Yanina?” said he.

“Albert, had you been a stranger, a foreigner, a simple lord, like that
Englishman who came to demand satisfaction three or four months since,
and whom I killed to get rid of, I should not have taken thi