 correct.”

“Take these documents, then; they do not concern me. You will give them
to your son, who will, of course, take great care of them.”

“I should think so, indeed! If he were to lose them——”

“Well, and if he were to lose them?” said Monte Cristo.

“In that case,” replied the major, “it would be necessary to write to
the curé for duplicates, and it would be some time before they could be
obtained.”

“It would be a difficult matter to arrange,” said Monte Cristo.

“Almost an impossibility,” replied the major.

“I am very glad to see that you understand the value of these papers.”

“I regard them as invaluable.”

“Now,” said Monte Cristo “as to the mother of the young man——”

“As to the mother of the young man——” repeated the Italian, with
anxiety.

“As regards the Marchesa Corsinari——”

“Really,” said the major, “difficulties seem to thicken upon us; will
she be wanted in any way?”

“No, sir,” replied Monte Cristo; “besides, has she not——”

“Yes, sir,” said the major, “she has——”

30127m



“Paid the last debt of nature?”

“Alas, yes,” returned the Italian.

“I knew that,” said Monte Cristo; “she has been dead these ten years.”

“And I am still mourning her loss,” exclaimed the major, drawing from
his pocket a checked handkerchief, and alternately wiping first the
left and then the right eye.

“What would you have?” said Monte Cristo; “we are all mortal. Now, you
understand, my dear Monsieur Cavalcanti, that it is useless for you to
tell people in France that you have been separated from your son for
fifteen years. Stories of gypsies, who steal children, are not at all
in vogue in this part of the world, and would not be believed. You sent
him for his education to a college in one of the provinces, and now you
wish him to complete his education in the Parisian world. That is the
reason which has induced you to leave Via Reggio, where you have lived
since the death of your wife. That will be sufficient.”

“You think so?”

“Certainly.”

“Very well, then.”

“If they should hear of the separation——”

“Ah, yes; what could I say?”

“That an unfaithful tutor, bought over by the enemies of your family——”

“By the Corsinari?”

“Precisely. Had stolen away this child, in order that your name might
become extinct.”

“That is reasonable, since he is an only son.”

“Well, now that all is arranged, do not let these newly awakened
remembrances be forgotten. You have, doubtless, already guessed that I
was preparing a surprise for you?”

“An agreeable one?” asked the Italian.

“Ah, I see the eye of a father is no more to be deceived than his
heart.”

“Hum!” said the major.

“Someone has told you the secret; or, perhaps, you guessed that he was
here.”

“That who was here?”

“Your child—your son—your Andrea!”

“I did guess it,” replied the major with the greatest possible
coolness. “Then he is here?”

“He is,” said Monte Cristo; “when the valet de chambre came in just
now, he told me of his arrival.”

“Ah, very well, very well,” said the major, clutching the buttons of
his coat at each exclamation.

“My dear sir,” said Monte Cristo, “I understand your emotion; you must
have time to recover yourself. I will, in the meantime, go and prepare
the young man for this much-desired interview, for I presume that he is
not less impatient for it than yourself.”

“I should quite imagine that to be the case,” said Cavalcanti.

“Well, in a quarter of an hour he shall be with you.”

“You will bring him, then? You carry your goodness so far as even to
present him to me yourself?”

“No; I do not wish to come between a father and son. Your interview
will be private. But do not be uneasy; even if the powerful voice of
nature should be silent, you cannot well mistake him; he will enter by
this door. He is a fine young man, of fair complexion—a little too
fair, perhaps—pleasing in manners; but you will see and judge for
yourself.”

“By t