istian,” stammered Caderousse, “you will make me
die of fright!”

“Now begone,” said the count, pointing to the window.

Caderousse, scarcely yet relying on this promise, put his legs out of
the window and stood on the ladder.

“Now go down,” said the abbé, folding his arms. Understanding he had
nothing more to fear from him, Caderousse began to go down. Then the
count brought the taper to the window, that it might be seen in the
Champs-Élysées that a man was getting out of the window while another
held a light.

“What are you doing, reverend sir? Suppose a watchman should pass?” And
he blew out the light. He then descended, but it was only when he felt
his foot touch the ground that he was satisfied of his safety.

Monte Cristo returned to his bedroom, and, glancing rapidly from the
garden to the street, he saw first Caderousse, who after walking to the
end of the garden, fixed his ladder against the wall at a different
part from where he came in. The count then looking over into the
street, saw the man who appeared to be waiting run in the same
direction, and place himself against the angle of the wall where
Caderousse would come over. Caderousse climbed the ladder slowly, and
looked over the coping to see if the street was quiet. No one could be
seen or heard. The clock of the Invalides struck one. Then Caderousse
sat astride the coping, and drawing up his ladder passed it over the
wall; then he began to descend, or rather to slide down by the two
stanchions, which he did with an ease which proved how accustomed he
was to the exercise. But, once started, he could not stop. In vain did
he see a man start from the shadow when he was halfway down—in vain did
he see an arm raised as he touched the ground.

Before he could defend himself that arm struck him so violently in the
back that he let go the ladder, crying, “Help!” A second blow struck
him almost immediately in the side, and he fell, calling, “Help,
murder!” Then, as he rolled on the ground, his adversary seized him by
the hair, and struck him a third blow in the chest.

This time Caderousse endeavored to call again, but he could only utter
a groan, and he shuddered as the blood flowed from his three wounds.
The assassin, finding that he no longer cried out, lifted his head up
by the hair; his eyes were closed, and the mouth was distorted. The
murderer, supposing him dead, let fall his head and disappeared.

Then Caderousse, feeling that he was leaving him, raised himself on his
elbow, and with a dying voice cried with great effort:

“Murder! I am dying! Help, reverend sir,—help!”

This mournful appeal pierced the darkness. The door of the
back-staircase opened, then the side-gate of the garden, and Ali and
his master were on the spot with lights.



 Chapter 83. The Hand of God

Caderousse continued to call piteously, “Help, reverend sir, help!”

“What is the matter?” asked Monte Cristo.

“Help,” cried Caderousse; “I am murdered!”

“We are here;—take courage.”

“Ah, it’s all over! You are come too late—you are come to see me die.
What blows, what blood!”

He fainted. Ali and his master conveyed the wounded man into a room.
Monte Cristo motioned to Ali to undress him, and he then examined his
dreadful wounds.

“My God!” he exclaimed, “thy vengeance is sometimes delayed, but only
that it may fall the more effectually.” Ali looked at his master for
further instructions. “Bring here immediately the king’s attorney, M.
de Villefort, who lives in the Faubourg Saint-Honoré. As you pass the
lodge, wake the porter, and send him for a surgeon.”

Ali obeyed, leaving the abbé alone with Caderousse, who had not yet
revived.

When the wretched man again opened his eyes, the count looked at him
with a mournful expression of pity, and his lips moved as if in prayer.
“A surgeon, reverend sir—a surgeon!” said Caderousse.

“I have sent for one,” replied the abbé.

“I know he cannot save my life, but 