hed to punish myself, but he has
pardoned me. Love me then, Haydée! Who knows? perhaps your love will
make me forget all that I do not wish to remember.”

“What do you mean, my lord?”

“I mean that one word from you has enlightened me more than twenty
years of slow experience; I have but you in the world, Haydée; through
you I again take hold on life, through you I shall suffer, through you
rejoice.”

“Do you hear him, Valentine?” exclaimed Haydée; “he says that through
me he will suffer—through _me_, who would yield my life for his.”

The count withdrew for a moment. “Have I discovered the truth?” he
said; “but whether it be for recompense or punishment, I accept my
fate. Come, Haydée, come!” and throwing his arm around the young girl’s
waist, he pressed the hand of Valentine, and disappeared.

50279m



An hour had nearly passed, during which Valentine, breathless and
motionless, watched steadfastly over Morrel. At length she felt his
heart beat, a faint breath played upon his lips, a slight shudder,
announcing the return of life, passed through the young man’s frame. At
length his eyes opened, but they were at first fixed and
expressionless; then sight returned, and with it feeling and grief.

“Oh,” he cried, in an accent of despair, “the count has deceived me; I
am yet living;” and extending his hand towards the table, he seized a
knife.

“Dearest,” exclaimed Valentine, with her adorable smile, “awake, and
look at me!” Morrel uttered a loud exclamation, and frantic, doubtful,
dazzled, as though by a celestial vision, he fell upon his knees.

The next morning at daybreak, Valentine and Morrel were walking
arm-in-arm on the seashore, Valentine relating how Monte Cristo had
appeared in her room, explained everything, revealed the crime, and,
finally, how he had saved her life by enabling her to simulate death.

They had found the door of the grotto opened, and gone forth; on the
azure dome of heaven still glittered a few remaining stars.

Morrel soon perceived a man standing among the rocks, apparently
awaiting a sign from them to advance, and pointed him out to Valentine.

“Ah, it is Jacopo,” she said, “the captain of the yacht;” and she
beckoned him towards them.

“Do you wish to speak to us?” asked Morrel.

“I have a letter to give you from the count.”

“From the count!” murmured the two young people.

“Yes; read it.”

50281m



Morrel opened the letter, and read:

“My Dear Maximilian,

“There is a felucca for you at anchor. Jacopo will carry you to
Leghorn, where Monsieur Noirtier awaits his granddaughter, whom he
wishes to bless before you lead her to the altar. All that is in this
grotto, my friend, my house in the Champs-Élysées, and my château at
Tréport, are the marriage gifts bestowed by Edmond Dantès upon the son
of his old master, Morrel. Mademoiselle de Villefort will share them
with you; for I entreat her to give to the poor the immense fortune
reverting to her from her father, now a madman, and her brother who
died last September with his mother. Tell the angel who will watch over
your future destiny, Morrel, to pray sometimes for a man, who, like
Satan, thought himself for an instant equal to God, but who now
acknowledges with Christian humility that God alone possesses supreme
power and infinite wisdom. Perhaps those prayers may soften the remorse
he feels in his heart. As for you, Morrel, this is the secret of my
conduct towards you. There is neither happiness nor misery in the
world; there is only the comparison of one state with another, nothing
more. He who has felt the deepest grief is best able to experience
supreme happiness. We must have felt what it is to die, Morrel, that we
may appreciate the enjoyments of living.

“Live, then, and be happy, beloved children of my heart, and never
forget that until the day when God shall deign to reveal the future to
man, all human wisdom is summed up in these two words,—‘_Wai