francs. We can dispose of the business, if
we please, in an hour, for I have received a letter from M. Delaunay,
in which he offers to purchase the good-will of the house, to unite
with his own, for 300,000 francs. Advise me what I had better do.’

“‘Emmanuel,’ returned my sister, ‘the house of Morrel can only be
carried on by a Morrel. Is it not worth 300,000 francs to save our
father’s name from the chances of evil fortune and failure?’

“‘I thought so,’ replied Emmanuel; ‘but I wished to have your advice.’

“‘This is my counsel:—Our accounts are made up and our bills paid; all
we have to do is to stop the issue of any more, and close our office.’

“This was done instantly. It was three o’clock; at a quarter past, a
merchant presented himself to insure two ships; it was a clear profit
of 15,000 francs.

“‘Monsieur,’ said Emmanuel, ‘have the goodness to address yourself to
M. Delaunay. We have quitted business.’

“‘How long?’ inquired the astonished merchant.

30043m



“‘A quarter of an hour,’ was the reply.

“And this is the reason, monsieur,” continued Maximilian, “of my sister
and brother-in-law having only 25,000 francs a year.”

Maximilian had scarcely finished his story, during which the count’s
heart had swelled within him, when Emmanuel entered wearing a hat and
coat. He saluted the count with the air of a man who is aware of the
rank of his guest; then, after having led Monte Cristo around the
little garden, he returned to the house.

A large vase of Japan porcelain, filled with flowers that loaded the
air with their perfume, stood in the salon. Julie, suitably dressed,
and her hair arranged (she had accomplished this feat in less than ten
minutes), received the count on his entrance. The songs of the birds
were heard in an aviary hard by, and the branches of laburnums and rose
acacias formed an exquisite framework to the blue velvet curtains.
Everything in this charming retreat, from the warble of the birds to
the smile of the mistress, breathed tranquillity and repose.

The count had felt the influence of this happiness from the moment he
entered the house, and he remained silent and pensive, forgetting that
he was expected to renew the conversation, which had ceased after the
first salutations had been exchanged. The silence became almost painful
when, by a violent effort, tearing himself from his pleasing reverie:

“Madame,” said he at length, “I pray you to excuse my emotion, which
must astonish you who are only accustomed to the happiness I meet here;
but contentment is so new a sight to me, that I could never be weary of
looking at yourself and your husband.”

“We are very happy, monsieur,” replied Julie; “but we have also known
unhappiness, and few have ever undergone more bitter sufferings than
ourselves.”

The count’s features displayed an expression of the most intense
curiosity.

“Oh, all this is a family history, as Château-Renaud told you the other
day,” observed Maximilian. “This humble picture would have but little
interest for you, accustomed as you are to behold the pleasures and the
misfortunes of the wealthy and industrious; but such as we are, we have
experienced bitter sorrows.”

“And God has poured balm into your wounds, as he does into those of all
who are in affliction?” said Monte Cristo inquiringly.

“Yes, count,” returned Julie, “we may indeed say he has, for he has
done for us what he grants only to his chosen; he sent us one of his
angels.”

The count’s cheeks became scarlet, and he coughed, in order to have an
excuse for putting his handkerchief to his mouth.

“Those born to wealth, and who have the means of gratifying every
wish,” said Emmanuel, “know not what is the real happiness of life,
just as those who have been tossed on the stormy waters of the ocean on
a few frail planks can alone realize the blessings of fair weather.”

Monte Cristo rose, and without making any answer (for the tremulousness