n which Albert had sustained the national
honor in the presence of the bandit.

“My dear Albert,” he said, “if you will make haste, we shall yet have
time to finish the night at Torlonia’s. You may conclude your
interrupted galop, so that you will owe no ill-will to Signor Luigi,
who has, indeed, throughout this whole affair acted like a gentleman.”

“You are decidedly right, and we may reach the Palazzo by two o’clock.
Signor Luigi,” continued Albert, “is there any formality to fulfil
before I take leave of your excellency?”

“None, sir,” replied the bandit, “you are as free as air.”

“Well, then, a happy and merry life to you. Come, gentlemen, come.”

And Albert, followed by Franz and the count, descended the staircase,
crossed the square chamber, where stood all the bandits, hat in hand.

“Peppino,” said the brigand chief, “give me the torch.”

“What are you going to do?” inquired the count.

“I will show you the way back myself,” said the captain; “that is the
least honor that I can render to your excellency.”

And taking the lighted torch from the hands of the herdsman, he
preceded his guests, not as a servant who performs an act of civility,
but like a king who precedes ambassadors. On reaching the door, he
bowed.

“And now, your excellency,” added he, “allow me to repeat my apologies,
and I hope you will not entertain any resentment at what has occurred.”

“No, my dear Vampa,” replied the count; “besides, you compensate for
your mistakes in so gentlemanly a way, that one almost feels obliged to
you for having committed them.”

20214m



“Gentlemen,” added the chief, turning towards the young men, “perhaps
the offer may not appear very tempting to you; but if you should ever
feel inclined to pay me a second visit, wherever I may be, you shall be
welcome.”

Franz and Albert bowed. The count went out first, then Albert. Franz
paused for a moment.

“Has your excellency anything to ask me?” said Vampa with a smile.

“Yes, I have,” replied Franz; “I am curious to know what work you were
perusing with so much attention as we entered.”

“Cæsar’s _Commentaries_,” said the bandit, “it is my favorite work.”

“Well, are you coming?” asked Albert.

“Yes,” replied Franz, “here I am,” and he, in his turn, left the caves.
They advanced to the plain.

“Ah, your pardon,” said Albert, turning round; “will you allow me,
captain?”

And he lighted his cigar at Vampa’s torch.

“Now, my dear count,” he said, “let us on with all the speed we may. I
am enormously anxious to finish my night at the Duke of Bracciano’s.”

They found the carriage where they had left it. The count said a word
in Arabic to Ali, and the horses went on at great speed.

It was just two o’clock by Albert’s watch when the two friends entered
into the dancing-room. Their return was quite an event, but as they
entered together, all uneasiness on Albert’s account ceased instantly.

“Madame,” said the Viscount of Morcerf, advancing towards the countess,
“yesterday you were so condescending as to promise me a galop; I am
rather late in claiming this gracious promise, but here is my friend,
whose character for veracity you well know, and he will assure you the
delay arose from no fault of mine.”

And as at this moment the orchestra gave the signal for the waltz,
Albert put his arm round the waist of the countess, and disappeared
with her in the whirl of dancers.

In the meanwhile Franz was considering the singular shudder that had
passed over the Count of Monte Cristo at the moment when he had been,
in some sort, forced to give his hand to Albert.



 Chapter 38. The Rendezvous

The first words that Albert uttered to his friend, on the following
morning, contained a request that Franz would accompany him on a visit
to the count; true, the young man had warmly and energetically thanked
the count on the previous evening; but services such as he had rendered
could never be too often a