ornelian appeased anger, and the hyacinth
provoked sleep, and the amethyst drove away the fumes of wine. The
garnet cast out demons, and the hydropicus deprived the moon of her
colour. The selenite waxed and waned with the moon, and the meloceus,
that discovers thieves, could be affected only by the blood of kids.
Leonardus Camillus had seen a white stone taken from the brain of a
newly killed toad, that was a certain antidote against poison. The
bezoar, that was found in the heart of the Arabian deer, was a charm
that could cure the plague. In the nests of Arabian birds was the
aspilates, that, according to Democritus, kept the wearer from any
danger by fire.

The King of Ceilan rode through his city with a large ruby in his hand,
as the ceremony of his coronation. The gates of the palace of John the
Priest were “made of sardius, with the horn of the horned snake
inwrought, so that no man might bring poison within.” Over the gable
were “two golden apples, in which were two carbuncles,” so that the
gold might shine by day and the carbuncles by night. In Lodge’s strange
romance ‘A Margarite of America’, it was stated that in the chamber of
the queen one could behold “all the chaste ladies of the world,
inchased out of silver, looking through fair mirrours of chrysolites,
carbuncles, sapphires, and greene emeraults.” Marco Polo had seen the
inhabitants of Zipangu place rose-coloured pearls in the mouths of the
dead. A sea-monster had been enamoured of the pearl that the diver
brought to King Perozes, and had slain the thief, and mourned for seven
moons over its loss. When the Huns lured the king into the great pit,
he flung it away—Procopius tells the story—nor was it ever found again,
though the Emperor Anastasius offered five hundred-weight of gold
pieces for it. The King of Malabar had shown to a certain Venetian a
rosary of three hundred and four pearls, one for every god that he
worshipped.

When the Duke de Valentinois, son of Alexander VI., visited Louis XII.
of France, his horse was loaded with gold leaves, according to
Brantome, and his cap had double rows of rubies that threw out a great
light. Charles of England had ridden in stirrups hung with four hundred
and twenty-one diamonds. Richard II had a coat, valued at thirty
thousand marks, which was covered with balas rubies. Hall described
Henry VIII., on his way to the Tower previous to his coronation, as
wearing “a jacket of raised gold, the placard embroidered with diamonds
and other rich stones, and a great bauderike about his neck of large
balasses.” The favourites of James I wore ear-rings of emeralds set in
gold filigrane. Edward II gave to Piers Gaveston a suit of red-gold
armour studded with jacinths, a collar of gold roses set with
turquoise-stones, and a skull-cap _parsemé_ with pearls. Henry II. wore
jewelled gloves reaching to the elbow, and had a hawk-glove sewn with
twelve rubies and fifty-two great orients. The ducal hat of Charles the
Rash, the last Duke of Burgundy of his race, was hung with pear-shaped
pearls and studded with sapphires.

How exquisite life had once been! How gorgeous in its pomp and
decoration! Even to read of the luxury of the dead was wonderful.

Then he turned his attention to embroideries and to the tapestries that
performed the office of frescoes in the chill rooms of the northern
nations of Europe. As he investigated the subject—and he always had an
extraordinary faculty of becoming absolutely absorbed for the moment in
whatever he took up—he was almost saddened by the reflection of the
ruin that time brought on beautiful and wonderful things. He, at any
rate, had escaped that. Summer followed summer, and the yellow jonquils
bloomed and died many times, and nights of horror repeated the story of
their shame, but he was unchanged. No winter marred his face or stained
his flowerlike bloom. How different it was with material things! Where
had they passed to? Where was t