. de Villefort’s,” answered Morrel, “but I
was of Madame de Saint-Méran.” Albert came up to them at this moment
with Franz.

“The time and place are but ill-suited for an introduction.” said
Albert; “but we are not superstitious. M. Morrel, allow me to present
to you M. Franz d’Épinay, a delightful travelling companion, with whom
I made the tour of Italy. My dear Franz, M. Maximilian Morrel, an
excellent friend I have acquired in your absence, and whose name you
will hear me mention every time I make any allusion to affection, wit,
or amiability.”

Morrel hesitated for a moment; he feared it would be hypocritical to
accost in a friendly manner the man whom he was tacitly opposing, but
his oath and the gravity of the circumstances recurred to his memory;
he struggled to conceal his emotion and bowed to Franz.

“Mademoiselle de Villefort is in deep sorrow, is she not?” said Debray
to Franz.

“Extremely,” replied he; “she looked so pale this morning, I scarcely
knew her.”

These apparently simple words pierced Morrel to the heart. This man had
seen Valentine, and spoken to her! The young and high-spirited officer
required all his strength of mind to resist breaking his oath. He took
the arm of Château-Renaud, and turned towards the vault, where the
attendants had already placed the two coffins.

“This is a magnificent habitation,” said Beauchamp, looking towards the
mausoleum; “a summer and winter palace. You will, in turn, enter it, my
dear d’Épinay, for you will soon be numbered as one of the family. I,
as a philosopher, should like a little country-house, a cottage down
there under the trees, without so many free-stones over my poor body.
In dying, I will say to those around me what Voltaire wrote to Piron:
‘_Eo rus_, and all will be over.’ But come, Franz, take courage, your
wife is an heiress.”

“Indeed, Beauchamp, you are unbearable. Politics has made you laugh at
everything, and political men have made you disbelieve everything. But
when you have the honor of associating with ordinary men, and the
pleasure of leaving politics for a moment, try to find your
affectionate heart, which you leave with your stick when you go to the
Chamber.”

“But tell me,” said Beauchamp, “what is life? Is it not a halt in
Death’s anteroom?”

40026m



“I am prejudiced against Beauchamp,” said Albert, drawing Franz away,
and leaving the former to finish his philosophical dissertation with
Debray.

The Villefort vault formed a square of white stones, about twenty feet
high; an interior partition separated the two families, and each
apartment had its entrance door. Here were not, as in other tombs,
ignoble drawers, one above another, where thrift bestows its dead and
labels them like specimens in a museum; all that was visible within the
bronze gates was a gloomy-looking room, separated by a wall from the
vault itself. The two doors before mentioned were in the middle of this
wall, and enclosed the Villefort and Saint-Méran coffins. There grief
might freely expend itself without being disturbed by the trifling
loungers who came from a picnic party to visit Père-Lachaise, or by
lovers who make it their rendezvous.

The two coffins were placed on trestles previously prepared for their
reception in the right-hand crypt belonging to the Saint-Méran family.
Villefort, Franz, and a few near relatives alone entered the sanctuary.

As the religious ceremonies had all been performed at the door, and
there was no address given, the party all separated; Château-Renaud,
Albert, and Morrel, went one way, and Debray and Beauchamp the other.
Franz remained with M. de Villefort; at the gate of the cemetery Morrel
made an excuse to wait; he saw Franz and M. de Villefort get into the
same mourning-coach, and thought this meeting forboded evil. He then
returned to Paris, and although in the same carriage with
Château-Renaud and Albert, he did not hear one word of their
conversation.

