 my own, so do not think
me mean on this account.”

Penelon turned to his companions, and exchanged a few words with them.

“As for that, M. Morrel,” said he, again turning his quid, “as for
that——”

“As for what?”

“The money.”

“Well——”

“Well, we all say that fifty francs will be enough for us at present,
and that we will wait for the rest.”

“Thanks, my friends, thanks!” cried Morrel gratefully; “take it—take
it; and if you can find another employer, enter his service; you are
free to do so.”

These last words produced a prodigious effect on the seaman. Penelon
nearly swallowed his quid; fortunately he recovered.

“What, M. Morrel!” said he in a low voice, “you send us away; you are
then angry with us!”

“No, no,” said M. Morrel, “I am not angry, quite the contrary, and I do
not send you away; but I have no more ships, and therefore I do not
want any sailors.”

“No more ships!” returned Penelon; “well, then, you’ll build some;
we’ll wait for you.”

“I have no money to build ships with, Penelon,” said the poor owner
mournfully, “so I cannot accept your kind offer.”

“No more money? Then you must not pay us; we can scud, like the
_Pharaon_, under bare poles.”

“Enough, enough!” cried Morrel, almost overpowered; “leave me, I pray
you; we shall meet again in a happier time. Emmanuel, go with them, and
see that my orders are executed.”

“At least, we shall see each other again, M. Morrel?” asked Penelon.

“Yes; I hope so, at least. Now go.” He made a sign to Cocles, who went
first; the seamen followed him and Emmanuel brought up the rear. “Now,”
said the owner to his wife and daughter, “leave me; I wish to speak
with this gentleman.”

20045m



And he glanced towards the clerk of Thomson & French, who had remained
motionless in the corner during this scene, in which he had taken no
part, except the few words we have mentioned. The two women looked at
this person whose presence they had entirely forgotten, and retired;
but, as she left the apartment, Julie gave the stranger a supplicating
glance, to which he replied by a smile that an indifferent spectator
would have been surprised to see on his stern features. The two men
were left alone. “Well, sir,” said Morrel, sinking into a chair, “you
have heard all, and I have nothing further to tell you.”

“I see,” returned the Englishman, “that a fresh and unmerited
misfortune has overwhelmed you, and this only increases my desire to
serve you.”

“Oh, sir!” cried Morrel.

“Let me see,” continued the stranger, “I am one of your largest
creditors.”

“Your bills, at least, are the first that will fall due.”

“Do you wish for time to pay?”

“A delay would save my honor, and consequently my life.”

“How long a delay do you wish for?”

Morrel reflected. “Two months,” said he.

“I will give you three,” replied the stranger.

“But,” asked Morrel, “will the house of Thomson & French consent?”

“Oh, I take everything on myself. Today is the 5th of June.”

“Yes.”

“Well, renew these bills up to the 5th of September; and on the 5th of
September at eleven o’clock (the hand of the clock pointed to eleven),
I shall come to receive the money.”

“I shall expect you,” returned Morrel; “and I will pay you—or I shall
be dead.” These last words were uttered in so low a tone that the
stranger could not hear them. The bills were renewed, the old ones
destroyed, and the poor ship-owner found himself with three months
before him to collect his resources. The Englishman received his thanks
with the phlegm peculiar to his nation; and Morrel, overwhelming him
with grateful blessings, conducted him to the staircase. The stranger
met Julie on the stairs; she pretended to be descending, but in reality
she was waiting for him. “Oh, sir”—said she, clasping her hands.

“Mademoiselle,” said the stranger, “one day you will receive a letter
signed ‘Sinbad the Sailor.’ Do exactly what the letter bids you,
however str