aid Debray, rising, “it is half-past two. Your guest
is charming, but you leave the best company to go into the worst
sometimes. I must return to the minister’s. I will tell him of the
count, and we shall soon know who he is.”

“Take care,” returned Albert; “no one has been able to accomplish
that.”

“Oh, we have three millions for our police; it is true they are almost
always spent beforehand, but, no matter, we shall still have fifty
thousand francs to spend for this purpose.”

“And when you know, will you tell me?”

“I promise you. _Au revoir_, Albert. Gentlemen, good morning.”

As he left the room, Debray called out loudly, “My carriage.”

“Bravo,” said Beauchamp to Albert; “I shall not go to the Chamber, but
I have something better to offer my readers than a speech of M.
Danglars.”

“For heaven’s sake, Beauchamp,” returned Morcerf, “do not deprive me of
the merit of introducing him everywhere. Is he not peculiar?”

“He is more than that,” replied Château-Renaud; “he is one of the most
extraordinary men I ever saw in my life. Are you coming, Morrel?”

“Directly I have given my card to the count, who has promised to pay us
a visit at Rue Meslay, No. 14.”

“Be sure I shall not fail to do so,” returned the count, bowing.

And Maximilian Morrel left the room with the Baron de Château-Renaud,
leaving Monte Cristo alone with Morcerf.



 Chapter 41. The Presentation

When Albert found himself alone with Monte Cristo, “My dear count,”
said he, “allow me to commence my services as _cicerone_ by showing you
a specimen of a bachelor’s apartment. You, who are accustomed to the
palaces of Italy, can amuse yourself by calculating in how many square
feet a young man who is not the worst lodged in Paris can live. As we
pass from one room to another, I will open the windows to let you
breathe.”

Monte Cristo had already seen the breakfast-room and the salon on the
ground floor. Albert led him first to his _atelier_, which was, as we
have said, his favorite apartment. Monte Cristo quickly appreciated all
that Albert had collected here—old cabinets, Japanese porcelain,
Oriental stuffs, Venetian glass, arms from all parts of the
world—everything was familiar to him; and at the first glance he
recognized their date, their country, and their origin.

Morcerf had expected he should be the guide; on the contrary, it was he
who, under the count’s guidance, followed a course of archæology,
mineralogy, and natural history.

They descended to the first floor; Albert led his guest into the salon.
The salon was filled with the works of modern artists; there were
landscapes by Dupré, with their long reeds and tall trees, their lowing
oxen and marvellous skies; Delacroix’s Arabian cavaliers, with their
long white burnouses, their shining belts, their damasked arms, their
horses, who tore each other with their teeth while their riders
contended fiercely with their maces; _aquarelles_ of Boulanger,
representing Notre Dame de Paris with that vigor that makes the artist
the rival of the poet; there were paintings by Diaz, who makes his
flowers more beautiful than flowers, his suns more brilliant than the
sun; designs by Decamp, as vividly colored as those of Salvator Rosa,
but more poetic; _pastels_ by Giraud and Müller, representing children
like angels and women with the features of a virgin; sketches torn from
the album of Dauzats’ “Travels in the East,” that had been made in a
few seconds on the saddle of a camel, or beneath the dome of a
mosque—in a word, all that modern art can give in exchange and as
recompense for the art lost and gone with ages long since past.

Albert expected to have something new this time to show to the
traveller, but, to his great surprise, the latter, without seeking for
the signatures, many of which, indeed, were only initials, named
instantly the author of every picture in such a manner that it was easy
to see that each name was not only known