d himself in the Corsican manner; that is, had formed the sign of
the cross in the air with his thumb, and as he seated himself in the
carriage, muttered a short prayer. Anyone but a man of exhaustless
thirst for knowledge would have had pity on seeing the steward’s
extraordinary repugnance for the count’s projected drive without the
walls; but the count was too curious to let Bertuccio off from this
little journey. In twenty minutes they were at Auteuil; the steward’s
emotion had continued to augment as they entered the village.
Bertuccio, crouched in the corner of the carriage, began to examine
with a feverish anxiety every house they passed.

“Tell them to stop at Rue de la Fontaine, No. 28,” said the count,
fixing his eyes on the steward, to whom he gave this order.

Bertuccio’s forehead was covered with perspiration; however, he obeyed,
and, leaning out of the window, he cried to the coachman,—“Rue de la
Fontaine, No. 28.” No. 28 was situated at the extremity of the village;
during the drive night had set in, and darkness gave the surroundings
the artificial appearance of a scene on the stage. The carriage
stopped, the footman sprang off the box and opened the door.

“Well,” said the count, “you do not get out, M. Bertuccio—you are going
to stay in the carriage, then? What are you thinking of this evening?”

Bertuccio sprang out, and offered his shoulder to the count, who, this
time, leaned upon it as he descended the three steps of the carriage.

“Knock,” said the count, “and announce me.”

Bertuccio knocked, the door opened, and the concierge appeared.

“What is it?” asked he.

“It is your new master, my good fellow,” said the footman. And he held
out to the concierge the notary’s order.

“The house is sold, then?” demanded the concierge; “and this gentleman
is coming to live here?”

“Yes, my friend,” returned the count; “and I will endeavor to give you
no cause to regret your old master.”

“Oh, monsieur,” said the concierge, “I shall not have much cause to
regret him, for he came here but seldom; it is five years since he was
here last, and he did well to sell the house, for it did not bring him
in anything at all.”

“What was the name of your old master?” said Monte Cristo.

“The Marquis of Saint-Méran. Ah, I am sure he has not sold the house
for what he gave for it.”

“The Marquis of Saint-Méran!” returned the count. “The name is not
unknown to me; the Marquis of Saint-Méran!” and he appeared to
meditate.

“An old gentleman,” continued the concierge, “a staunch follower of the
Bourbons; he had an only daughter, who married M. de Villefort, who had
been the king’s attorney at Nîmes, and afterwards at Versailles.”

Monte Cristo glanced at Bertuccio, who became whiter than the wall
against which he leaned to prevent himself from falling.

“And is not this daughter dead?” demanded Monte Cristo; “I fancy I have
heard so.”

“Yes, monsieur, one-and-twenty years ago; and since then we have not
seen the poor marquis three times.”

“Thanks, thanks,” said Monte Cristo, judging from the steward’s utter
prostration that he could not stretch the cord further without danger
of breaking it. “Give me a light.”

“Shall I accompany you, monsieur?”

“No, it is unnecessary; Bertuccio will show me a light.”

And Monte Cristo accompanied these words by the gift of two gold
pieces, which produced a torrent of thanks and blessings from the
concierge.

“Ah, monsieur,” said he, after having vainly searched on the
mantle-piece and the shelves, “I have not got any candles.”

“Take one of the carriage-lamps, Bertuccio,” said the count, “and show
me the apartments.”

The steward obeyed in silence, but it was easy to see, from the manner
in which the hand that held the light trembled, how much it cost him to
obey. They went over a tolerably large ground floor; a first floor
consisted of a salon, a bathroom, and two bedrooms; near one of the
bedrooms they came