ntarily murmured softly:

“Edmond, Edmond, Edmond!”



 Chapter 113. The Past

The count departed with a sad heart from the house in which he had left
Mercédès, probably never to behold her again. Since the death of little
Edward a great change had taken place in Monte Cristo. Having reached
the summit of his vengeance by a long and tortuous path, he saw an
abyss of doubt yawning before him. More than this, the conversation
which had just taken place between Mercédès and himself had awakened so
many recollections in his heart that he felt it necessary to combat
with them. A man of the count’s temperament could not long indulge in
that melancholy which can exist in common minds, but which destroys
superior ones. He thought he must have made an error in his
calculations if he now found cause to blame himself.

“I cannot have deceived myself,” he said; “I must look upon the past in
a false light. What!” he continued, “can I have been following a false
path?—can the end which I proposed be a mistaken end?—can one hour have
sufficed to prove to an architect that the work upon which he founded
all his hopes was an impossible, if not a sacrilegious, undertaking? I
cannot reconcile myself to this idea—it would madden me. The reason why
I am now dissatisfied is that I have not a clear appreciation of the
past. The past, like the country through which we walk, becomes
indistinct as we advance. My position is like that of a person wounded
in a dream; he feels the wound, though he cannot recollect when he
received it.

“Come, then, thou regenerate man, thou extravagant prodigal, thou
awakened sleeper, thou all-powerful visionary, thou invincible
millionaire,—once again review thy past life of starvation and
wretchedness, revisit the scenes where fate and misfortune conducted,
and where despair received thee. Too many diamonds, too much gold and
splendor, are now reflected by the mirror in which Monte Cristo seeks
to behold Dantès. Hide thy diamonds, bury thy gold, shroud thy
splendor, exchange riches for poverty, liberty for a prison, a living
body for a corpse!”

As he thus reasoned, Monte Cristo walked down the Rue de la Caisserie.
It was the same through which, twenty-four years ago, he had been
conducted by a silent and nocturnal guard; the houses, today so smiling
and animated, were on that night dark, mute, and closed.

“And yet they were the same,” murmured Monte Cristo, “only now it is
broad daylight instead of night; it is the sun which brightens the
place, and makes it appear so cheerful.”

He proceeded towards the quay by the Rue Saint-Laurent, and advanced to
the Consigne; it was the point where he had embarked. A pleasure-boat
with striped awning was going by. Monte Cristo called the owner, who
immediately rowed up to him with the eagerness of a boatman hoping for
a good fare.

The weather was magnificent, and the excursion a treat. The sun, red
and flaming, was sinking into the embrace of the welcoming ocean. The
sea, smooth as crystal, was now and then disturbed by the leaping of
fish, which were pursued by some unseen enemy and sought for safety in
another element; while on the extreme verge of the horizon might be
seen the fishermen’s boats, white and graceful as the sea-gull, or the
merchant vessels bound for Corsica or Spain.

But notwithstanding the serene sky, the gracefully formed boats, and
the golden light in which the whole scene was bathed, the Count of
Monte Cristo, wrapped in his cloak, could think only of this terrible
voyage, the details of which were one by one recalled to his memory.
The solitary light burning at the Catalans; that first sight of the
Château d’If, which told him whither they were leading him; the
struggle with the gendarmes when he wished to throw himself overboard;
his despair when he found himself vanquished, and the sensation when
the muzzle of the carbine touched his forehead—all these were brought
before him in v