elf by the
side of her friend.

A quarter of an hour afterwards the postilion, having been put in the
right road, passed with a crack of his whip through the gateway of the
Barrière Saint-Martin.

“Ah,” said Louise, breathing freely, “here we are out of Paris.”

“Yes, my dear, the abduction is an accomplished fact,” replied Eugénie.

“Yes, and without violence,” said Louise.

“I shall bring that forward as an extenuating circumstance,” replied
Eugénie.

These words were lost in the noise which the carriage made in rolling
over the pavement of La Villette. M. Danglars no longer had a daughter.



 Chapter 98. The Bell and Bottle Tavern

And now let us leave Mademoiselle Danglars and her friend pursuing
their way to Brussels, and return to poor Andrea Cavalcanti, so
inopportunely interrupted in his rise to fortune. Notwithstanding his
youth, Master Andrea was a very skilful and intelligent boy. We have
seen that on the first rumor which reached the salon he had gradually
approached the door, and crossing two or three rooms at last
disappeared. But we have forgotten to mention one circumstance, which
nevertheless ought not to be omitted; in one of the rooms he crossed,
the _trousseau_ of the bride-elect was on exhibition. There were
caskets of diamonds, cashmere shawls, Valenciennes lace, English veils,
and in fact all the tempting things, the bare mention of which makes
the hearts of young girls bound with joy, and which is called the
_corbeille_.22 Now, in passing through this room, Andrea proved himself
not only to be clever and intelligent, but also provident, for he
helped himself to the most valuable of the ornaments before him.

Furnished with this plunder, Andrea leaped with a lighter heart from
the window, intending to slip through the hands of the gendarmes. Tall
and well proportioned as an ancient gladiator, and muscular as a
Spartan, he walked for a quarter of an hour without knowing where to
direct his steps, actuated by the sole idea of getting away from the
spot where if he lingered he knew that he would surely be taken. Having
passed through the Rue du Mont-Blanc, guided by the instinct which
leads thieves always to take the safest path, he found himself at the
end of the Rue La Fayette. There he stopped, breathless and panting. He
was quite alone; on one side was the vast wilderness of the
Saint-Lazare, on the other, Paris enshrouded in darkness.

“Am I to be captured?” he cried; “no, not if I can use more activity
than my enemies. My safety is now a mere question of speed.”

At this moment he saw a cab at the top of the Faubourg Poissonnière.
The dull driver, smoking his pipe, was plodding along toward the limits
of the Faubourg Saint-Denis, where no doubt he ordinarily had his
station.

“Ho, friend!” said Benedetto.

“What do you want, sir?” asked the driver.

“Is your horse tired?”

“Tired? oh, yes, tired enough—he has done nothing the whole of this
blessed day! Four wretched fares, and twenty sous over, making in all
seven francs, are all that I have earned, and I ought to take ten to
the owner.”

“Will you add these twenty francs to the seven you have?”

“With pleasure, sir; twenty francs are not to be despised. Tell me what
I am to do for this.”

“A very easy thing, if your horse isn’t tired.”

“I tell you he’ll go like the wind,—only tell me which way to drive.”

“Towards the Louvres.”

“Ah, I know the way—you get good sweetened rum over there.”

“Exactly so; I merely wish to overtake one of my friends, with whom I
am going to hunt tomorrow at Chapelle-en-Serval. He should have waited
for me here with a cabriolet till half-past eleven; it is twelve, and,
tired of waiting, he must have gone on.”

“It is likely.”

“Well, will you try and overtake him?”

“Nothing I should like better.”

“If you do not overtake him before we reach Bourget you shall have
twenty francs; if not before Louvres, thirty.”

“And if we do 