fore, I ask, who comes to make an end of the
Lone Wolf? For it is my right, by the Law of the Jungle, that ye come
one by one.”

There was a long hush, for no single wolf cared to fight Akela to
the death. Then Shere Khan roared: “Bah! What have we to do with this
toothless fool? He is doomed to die! It is the man-cub who has lived too
long. Free People, he was my meat from the first. Give him to me. I
am weary of this man-wolf folly. He has troubled the jungle for ten
seasons. Give me the man-cub, or I will hunt here always, and not give
you one bone. He is a man, a man’s child, and from the marrow of my
bones I hate him!”

Then more than half the Pack yelled: “A man! A man! What has a man to do
with us? Let him go to his own place.”

“And turn all the people of the villages against us?” clamored Shere
Khan. “No, give him to me. He is a man, and none of us can look him
between the eyes.”

Akela lifted his head again and said, “He has eaten our food. He has
slept with us. He has driven game for us. He has broken no word of the
Law of the Jungle.”

“Also, I paid for him with a bull when he was accepted. The worth of a
bull is little, but Bagheera’s honor is something that he will perhaps
fight for,” said Bagheera in his gentlest voice.

“A bull paid ten years ago!” the Pack snarled. “What do we care for
bones ten years old?”

“Or for a pledge?” said Bagheera, his white teeth bared under his lip.
“Well are ye called the Free People!”

“No man’s cub can run with the people of the jungle,” howled Shere Khan.
“Give him to me!”

“He is our brother in all but blood,” Akela went on, “and ye would kill
him here! In truth, I have lived too long. Some of ye are eaters of
cattle, and of others I have heard that, under Shere Khan’s teaching,
ye go by dark night and snatch children from the villager’s doorstep.
Therefore I know ye to be cowards, and it is to cowards I speak. It is
certain that I must die, and my life is of no worth, or I would offer
that in the man-cub’s place. But for the sake of the Honor of
the Pack,--a little matter that by being without a leader ye have
forgotten,--I promise that if ye let the man-cub go to his own place, I
will not, when my time comes to die, bare one tooth against ye. I will
die without fighting. That will at least save the Pack three lives.
More I cannot do; but if ye will, I can save ye the shame that comes of
killing a brother against whom there is no fault--a brother spoken for
and bought into the Pack according to the Law of the Jungle.”

“He is a man--a man--a man!” snarled the Pack. And most of the wolves
began to gather round Shere Khan, whose tail was beginning to switch.

“Now the business is in thy hands,” said Bagheera to Mowgli. “We can do
no more except fight.”

Mowgli stood upright--the fire pot in his hands. Then he stretched out
his arms, and yawned in the face of the Council; but he was furious with
rage and sorrow, for, wolflike, the wolves had never told him how they
hated him. “Listen you!” he cried. “There is no need for this dog’s
jabber. Ye have told me so often tonight that I am a man (and indeed I
would have been a wolf with you to my life’s end) that I feel your words
are true. So I do not call ye my brothers any more, but sag [dogs], as
a man should. What ye will do, and what ye will not do, is not yours
to say. That matter is with me; and that we may see the matter more
plainly, I, the man, have brought here a little of the Red Flower which
ye, dogs, fear.”

He flung the fire pot on the ground, and some of the red coals lit
a tuft of dried moss that flared up, as all the Council drew back in
terror before the leaping flames.

Mowgli thrust his dead branch into the fire till the twigs lit and
crackled, and whirled it above his head among the cowering wolves.

“Thou art the master,” said Bagheera in an undertone. “Save Akela from
the death. He was ever thy friend.”

Akela, the grim old wolf who 