had never asked for mercy in his life, gave
one piteous look at Mowgli as the boy stood all naked, his long black
hair tossing over his shoulders in the light of the blazing branch that
made the shadows jump and quiver.

“Good!” said Mowgli, staring round slowly. “I see that ye are dogs. I go
from you to my own people--if they be my own people. The jungle is shut
to me, and I must forget your talk and your companionship. But I will be
more merciful than ye are. Because I was all but your brother in blood,
I promise that when I am a man among men I will not betray ye to men as
ye have betrayed me.” He kicked the fire with his foot, and the sparks
flew up. “There shall be no war between any of us in the Pack. But here
is a debt to pay before I go.” He strode forward to where Shere Khan sat
blinking stupidly at the flames, and caught him by the tuft on his chin.
Bagheera followed in case of accidents. “Up, dog!” Mowgli cried. “Up,
when a man speaks, or I will set that coat ablaze!”

Shere Khan’s ears lay flat back on his head, and he shut his eyes, for
the blazing branch was very near.

“This cattle-killer said he would kill me in the Council because he had
not killed me when I was a cub. Thus and thus, then, do we beat dogs
when we are men. Stir a whisker, Lungri, and I ram the Red Flower down
thy gullet!” He beat Shere Khan over the head with the branch, and the
tiger whimpered and whined in an agony of fear.

“Pah! Singed jungle cat--go now! But remember when next I come to the
Council Rock, as a man should come, it will be with Shere Khan’s hide
on my head. For the rest, Akela goes free to live as he pleases. Ye will
not kill him, because that is not my will. Nor do I think that ye
will sit here any longer, lolling out your tongues as though ye were
somebodies, instead of dogs whom I drive out--thus! Go!” The fire was
burning furiously at the end of the branch, and Mowgli struck right
and left round the circle, and the wolves ran howling with the sparks
burning their fur. At last there were only Akela, Bagheera, and perhaps
ten wolves that had taken Mowgli’s part. Then something began to hurt
Mowgli inside him, as he had never been hurt in his life before, and he
caught his breath and sobbed, and the tears ran down his face.

“What is it? What is it?” he said. “I do not wish to leave the jungle,
and I do not know what this is. Am I dying, Bagheera?”

“No, Little Brother. That is only tears such as men use,” said Bagheera.
“Now I know thou art a man, and a man’s cub no longer. The jungle is
shut indeed to thee henceforward. Let them fall, Mowgli. They are only
tears.” So Mowgli sat and cried as though his heart would break; and he
had never cried in all his life before.

“Now,” he said, “I will go to men. But first I must say farewell to my
mother.” And he went to the cave where she lived with Father Wolf, and
he cried on her coat, while the four cubs howled miserably.

“Ye will not forget me?” said Mowgli.

“Never while we can follow a trail,” said the cubs. “Come to the foot of
the hill when thou art a man, and we will talk to thee; and we will come
into the croplands to play with thee by night.”

“Come soon!” said Father Wolf. “Oh, wise little frog, come again soon;
for we be old, thy mother and I.”

“Come soon,” said Mother Wolf, “little naked son of mine. For, listen,
child of man, I loved thee more than ever I loved my cubs.”

“I will surely come,” said Mowgli. “And when I come it will be to lay
out Shere Khan’s hide upon the Council Rock. Do not forget me! Tell them
in the jungle never to forget me!”

The dawn was beginning to break when Mowgli went down the hillside
alone, to meet those mysterious things that are called men.




Hunting-Song of the Seeonee Pack

     As the dawn was breaking the Sambhur belled
        Once, twice and again!
     And a doe leaped up, and a doe leaped up
     From the pond in the wood where the wild deer sup.