ancs payable shortly; they are all
signed by you, and assigned to our house by the holders.”

“I recognize them,” said Morrel, whose face was suffused, as he thought
that, for the first time in his life, he would be unable to honor his
own signature. “Is this all?”

“No, I have for the end of the month these bills which have been
assigned to us by the house of Pascal, and the house of Wild & Turner
of Marseilles, amounting to nearly 55,000 francs; in all, 287,500
francs.”

It is impossible to describe what Morrel suffered during this
enumeration. “Two hundred and eighty-seven thousand five hundred
francs,” repeated he.

“Yes, sir,” replied the Englishman. “I will not,” continued he, after a
moment’s silence, “conceal from you, that while your probity and
exactitude up to this moment are universally acknowledged, yet the
report is current in Marseilles that you are not able to meet your
liabilities.”

At this almost brutal speech Morrel turned deathly pale.

“Sir,” said he, “up to this time—and it is now more than
four-and-twenty years since I received the direction of this house from
my father, who had himself conducted it for five-and-thirty years—never
has anything bearing the signature of Morrel & Son been dishonored.”

“I know that,” replied the Englishman. “But as a man of honor should
answer another, tell me fairly, shall you pay these with the same
punctuality?”

Morrel shuddered, and looked at the man, who spoke with more assurance
than he had hitherto shown.

“To questions frankly put,” said he, “a straightforward answer should
be given. Yes, I shall pay, if, as I hope, my vessel arrives safely;
for its arrival will again procure me the credit which the numerous
accidents, of which I have been the victim, have deprived me; but if
the _Pharaon_ should be lost, and this last resource be gone——”

The poor man’s eyes filled with tears.

“Well,” said the other, “if this last resource fail you?”

“Well,” returned Morrel, “it is a cruel thing to be forced to say, but,
already used to misfortune, I must habituate myself to shame. I fear I
shall be forced to suspend payment.”

“Have you no friends who could assist you?”

Morrel smiled mournfully.

“In business, sir,” said he, “one has no friends, only correspondents.”

“It is true,” murmured the Englishman; “then you have but one hope.”

“But one.”

“The last?”

“The last.”

“So that if this fail——”

“I am ruined,—completely ruined!”

“As I was on my way here, a vessel was coming into port.”

“I know it, sir; a young man, who still adheres to my fallen fortunes,
passes a part of his time in a belvedere at the top of the house, in
hopes of being the first to announce good news to me; he has informed
me of the arrival of this ship.”

“And it is not yours?”

“No, she is a Bordeaux vessel, _La Gironde_; she comes from India also;
but she is not mine.”

“Perhaps she has spoken to the _Pharaon_, and brings you some tidings
of her?”

“Shall I tell you plainly one thing, sir? I dread almost as much to
receive any tidings of my vessel as to remain in doubt. Uncertainty is
still hope.” Then in a low voice Morrel added,—“This delay is not
natural. The _Pharaon_ left Calcutta the 5th of February; she ought to
have been here a month ago.”

“What is that?” said the Englishman. “What is the meaning of that
noise?”

“Oh, my God!” cried Morrel, turning pale, “what is it?”

A loud noise was heard on the stairs of people moving hastily, and
half-stifled sobs. Morrel rose and advanced to the door; but his
strength failed him and he sank into a chair. The two men remained
opposite one another, Morrel trembling in every limb, the stranger
gazing at him with an air of profound pity. The noise had ceased; but
it seemed that Morrel expected something—something had occasioned the
noise, and something must follow. The stranger fancied he heard
footsteps on the stairs; and that the footsteps, which were t