ange it may appear.”

“Yes, sir,” returned Julie.

“Do you promise?”

“I swear to you I will.”

“It is well. Adieu, mademoiselle. Continue to be the good, sweet girl
you are at present, and I have great hopes that Heaven will reward you
by giving you Emmanuel for a husband.”

Julie uttered a faint cry, blushed like a rose, and leaned against the
baluster. The stranger waved his hand, and continued to descend. In the
court he found Penelon, who, with a rouleau of a hundred francs in
either hand, seemed unable to make up his mind to retain them. “Come
with me, my friend,” said the Englishman; “I wish to speak to you.”



 Chapter 30. The Fifth of September

The extension provided for by the agent of Thomson & French, at the
moment when Morrel expected it least, was to the poor shipowner so
decided a stroke of good fortune that he almost dared to believe that
fate was at length grown weary of wasting her spite upon him. The same
day he told his wife, Emmanuel, and his daughter all that had occurred;
and a ray of hope, if not of tranquillity, returned to the family.
Unfortunately, however, Morrel had not only engagements with the house
of Thomson & French, who had shown themselves so considerate towards
him; and, as he had said, in business he had correspondents, and not
friends. When he thought the matter over, he could by no means account
for this generous conduct on the part of Thomson & French towards him;
and could only attribute it to some such selfish argument as this: “We
had better help a man who owes us nearly 300,000 francs, and have those
300,000 francs at the end of three months than hasten his ruin, and get
only six or eight per cent of our money back again.”

Unfortunately, whether through envy or stupidity, all Morrel’s
correspondents did not take this view; and some even came to a contrary
decision. The bills signed by Morrel were presented at his office with
scrupulous exactitude, and, thanks to the delay granted by the
Englishman, were paid by Cocles with equal punctuality. Cocles thus
remained in his accustomed tranquillity. It was Morrel alone who
remembered with alarm, that if he had to repay on the 15th the 50,000
francs of M. de Boville, and on the 30th the 32,500 francs of bills,
for which, as well as the debt due to the inspector of prisons, he had
time granted, he must be a ruined man.

The opinion of all the commercial men was that, under the reverses
which had successively weighed down Morrel, it was impossible for him
to remain solvent. Great, therefore, was the astonishment when at the
end of the month, he cancelled all his obligations with his usual
punctuality. Still confidence was not restored to all minds, and the
general opinion was that the complete ruin of the unfortunate shipowner
had been postponed only until the end of the month.

The month passed, and Morrel made extraordinary efforts to get in all
his resources. Formerly his paper, at any date, was taken with
confidence, and was even in request. Morrel now tried to negotiate
bills at ninety days only, and none of the banks would give him credit.
Fortunately, Morrel had some funds coming in on which he could rely;
and, as they reached him, he found himself in a condition to meet his
engagements when the end of July came.

The agent of Thomson & French had not been again seen at Marseilles;
the day after, or two days after his visit to Morrel, he had
disappeared; and as in that city he had had no intercourse but with the
mayor, the inspector of prisons, and M. Morrel, his departure left no
trace except in the memories of these three persons. As to the sailors
of the _Pharaon_, they must have found snug berths elsewhere, for they
also had disappeared.

Captain Gaumard, recovered from his illness, had returned from Palma.
He delayed presenting himself at Morrel’s, but the owner, hearing of
his arrival, went to see him. The worthy shipowner knew, from Penelon’s
recital