y pay, have spoken to Petersen
Sahib of the matter.” Little Toomai was frightened. He did not know much
of white men, but Petersen Sahib was the greatest white man in the world
to him. He was the head of all the Keddah operations--the man who caught
all the elephants for the Government of India, and who knew more about
the ways of elephants than any living man.

“What--what will happen?” said Little Toomai.

“Happen! The worst that can happen. Petersen Sahib is a madman. Else why
should he go hunting these wild devils? He may even require thee to be
an elephant catcher, to sleep anywhere in these fever-filled jungles,
and at last to be trampled to death in the Keddah. It is well that this
nonsense ends safely. Next week the catching is over, and we of the
plains are sent back to our stations. Then we will march on smooth
roads, and forget all this hunting. But, son, I am angry that thou
shouldst meddle in the business that belongs to these dirty Assamese
jungle folk. Kala Nag will obey none but me, so I must go with him into
the Keddah, but he is only a fighting elephant, and he does not help
to rope them. So I sit at my ease, as befits a mahout,--not a mere
hunter,--a mahout, I say, and a man who gets a pension at the end of
his service. Is the family of Toomai of the Elephants to be trodden
underfoot in the dirt of a Keddah? Bad one! Wicked one! Worthless son!
Go and wash Kala Nag and attend to his ears, and see that there are no
thorns in his feet. Or else Petersen Sahib will surely catch thee and
make thee a wild hunter--a follower of elephant’s foot tracks, a jungle
bear. Bah! Shame! Go!”

Little Toomai went off without saying a word, but he told Kala Nag all
his grievances while he was examining his feet. “No matter,” said Little
Toomai, turning up the fringe of Kala Nag’s huge right ear. “They
have said my name to Petersen Sahib, and perhaps--and perhaps--and
perhaps--who knows? Hai! That is a big thorn that I have pulled out!”

The next few days were spent in getting the elephants together, in
walking the newly caught wild elephants up and down between a couple of
tame ones to prevent them giving too much trouble on the downward march
to the plains, and in taking stock of the blankets and ropes and things
that had been worn out or lost in the forest.

Petersen Sahib came in on his clever she-elephant Pudmini; he had been
paying off other camps among the hills, for the season was coming to an
end, and there was a native clerk sitting at a table under a tree, to
pay the drivers their wages. As each man was paid he went back to his
elephant, and joined the line that stood ready to start. The catchers,
and hunters, and beaters, the men of the regular Keddah, who stayed in
the jungle year in and year out, sat on the backs of the elephants that
belonged to Petersen Sahib’s permanent force, or leaned against the
trees with their guns across their arms, and made fun of the drivers who
were going away, and laughed when the newly caught elephants broke the
line and ran about.

Big Toomai went up to the clerk with Little Toomai behind him, and
Machua Appa, the head tracker, said in an undertone to a friend of his,
“There goes one piece of good elephant stuff at least. ’Tis a pity to
send that young jungle-cock to molt in the plains.”

Now Petersen Sahib had ears all over him, as a man must have who listens
to the most silent of all living things--the wild elephant. He turned
where he was lying all along on Pudmini’s back and said, “What is that?
I did not know of a man among the plains-drivers who had wit enough to
rope even a dead elephant.”

“This is not a man, but a boy. He went into the Keddah at the last
drive, and threw Barmao there the rope, when we were trying to get that
young calf with the blotch on his shoulder away from his mother.”

Machua Appa pointed at Little Toomai, and Petersen Sahib looked, and
Little Toomai bowed to the earth.

“He throw a r