eft the count, sir,” said he; “he is, doubtless, a
delightful man but inconceivably peculiar in his ideas. He esteems me
highly. He even told me he had not the slightest doubt that my father
would give me the capital instead of the interest of my property. He
has promised to use his influence to obtain it for me; but he also
declared that he never had taken on himself the responsibility of
making proposals for another, and he never would. I must, however, do
him the justice to add that he assured me if ever he had regretted the
repugnance he felt to such a step it was on this occasion, because he
thought the projected union would be a happy and suitable one. Besides,
if he will do nothing officially, he will answer any questions you
propose to him. And now,” continued he, with one of his most charming
smiles, “having finished talking to the father-in-law, I must address
myself to the banker.”

“And what may you have to say to him?” said Danglars, laughing in his
turn.

“That the day after tomorrow I shall have to draw upon you for about
four thousand francs; but the count, expecting my bachelor’s revenue
could not suffice for the coming month’s outlay, has offered me a draft
for twenty thousand francs. It bears his signature, as you see, which
is all-sufficient.”

“Bring me a million such as that,” said Danglars, “I shall be well
pleased,” putting the draft in his pocket. “Fix your own hour for
tomorrow, and my cashier shall call on you with a check for eighty
thousand francs.”

“At ten o’clock then, if you please; I should like it early, as I am
going into the country tomorrow.”

“Very well, at ten o’clock; you are still at the Hôtel des Princes?”

“Yes.”

The following morning, with the banker’s usual punctuality, the eighty
thousand francs were placed in the young man’s hands, as he was on the
point of starting, after having left two hundred francs for Caderousse.
He went out chiefly to avoid this dangerous enemy, and returned as late
as possible in the evening.

But scarcely had he stepped out of his carriage when the porter met him
with a parcel in his hand.

“Sir,” said he, “that man has been here.”

“What man?” said Andrea carelessly, apparently forgetting him whom he
but too well recollected.

“Him to whom your excellency pays that little annuity.”

“Oh,” said Andrea, “my father’s old servant. Well, you gave him the two
hundred francs I had left for him?”

“Yes, your excellency.” Andrea had expressed a wish to be thus
addressed. “But,” continued the porter, “he would not take them.”

Andrea turned pale, but as it was dark his pallor was not perceptible.
“What? he would not take them?” said he with slight emotion.

40130m



“No, he wished to speak to your excellency; I told him you were gone
out, and after some dispute he believed me and gave me this letter,
which he had brought with him already sealed.”

“Give it me,” said Andrea, and he read by the light of his
carriage-lamp:

“‘You know where I live; I expect you tomorrow morning at nine
o’clock.’”

Andrea examined it carefully, to ascertain if the letter had been
opened, or if any indiscreet eyes had seen its contents; but it was so
carefully folded, that no one could have read it, and the seal was
perfect.

“Very well,” said he. “Poor man, he is a worthy creature.” He left the
porter to ponder on these words, not knowing which most to admire, the
master or the servant.

“Take out the horses quickly, and come up to me,” said Andrea to his
groom. In two seconds the young man had reached his room and burnt
Caderousse’s letter. The servant entered just as he had finished.

“You are about my height, Pierre,” said he.

“I have that honor, your excellency.”

“You had a new livery yesterday?”

“Yes, sir.”

“I have an engagement with a pretty little girl for this evening, and
do not wish to be known; lend me your livery till tomorrow. I may
sleep, perhaps, at an inn.”

Pierr