, think of me.’

“‘In another week you will have left Beaucaire,’ remarked Caderousse,
‘for the fair ends in a few days.’

“‘True, but that makes no difference. Write to me at Paris, to M.
Joannes, in the Palais Royal, arcade Pierre, No. 45. I will make the
journey on purpose to see him, if it is worth while.’

“At this moment there was a tremendous clap of thunder, accompanied by
a flash of lightning so vivid, that it quite eclipsed the light of the
lamp.

20307m



“‘See here,’ exclaimed Caderousse. ‘You cannot think of going out in
such weather as this.’

“‘Oh, I am not afraid of thunder,’ said the jeweller.

“‘And then there are robbers,’ said La Carconte. ‘The road is never
very safe during fair time.’

“‘Oh, as to the robbers,’ said Joannes, ‘here is something for them,’
and he drew from his pocket a pair of small pistols, loaded to the
muzzle. ‘Here,’ said he, ‘are dogs who bark and bite at the same time,
they are for the two first who shall have a longing for your diamond,
Friend Caderousse.’

“Caderousse and his wife again interchanged a meaning look. It seemed
as though they were both inspired at the same time with some horrible
thought. ‘Well, then, a good journey to you,’ said Caderousse.

“‘Thanks,’ replied the jeweller. He then took his cane, which he had
placed against an old cupboard, and went out. At the moment when he
opened the door, such a gust of wind came in that the lamp was nearly
extinguished. ‘Oh,’ said he, ‘this is very nice weather, and two
leagues to go in such a storm.’

“‘Remain,’ said Caderousse. ‘You can sleep here.’

“‘Yes; do stay,’ added La Carconte in a tremulous voice; ‘we will take
every care of you.’

“‘No; I must sleep at Beaucaire. So, once more, good-night.’ Caderousse
followed him slowly to the threshold. ‘I can see neither heaven nor
earth,’ said the jeweller, who was outside the door. ‘Do I turn to the
right, or to the left hand?’

“‘To the right,’ said Caderousse. ‘You cannot go wrong—the road is
bordered by trees on both sides.’

“‘Good—all right,’ said a voice almost lost in the distance.

“‘Close the door,’ said La Carconte; ‘I do not like open doors when it
thunders.’

“‘Particularly when there is money in the house, eh?’ answered
Caderousse, double-locking the door.

20311m



“He came into the room, went to the cupboard, took out the bag and
pocket-book, and both began, for the third time, to count their gold
and bank-notes. I never saw such an expression of cupidity as the
flickering lamp revealed in those two countenances. The woman,
especially, was hideous; her usual feverish tremulousness was
intensified, her countenance had become livid, and her eyes resembled
burning coals.

“‘Why,’ she inquired in a hoarse voice, ‘did you invite him to sleep
here tonight?’

“‘Why?’ said Caderousse with a shudder; ‘why, that he might not have
the trouble of returning to Beaucaire.’

“‘Ah,’ responded the woman, with an expression impossible to describe;
‘I thought it was for something else.’

“‘Woman, woman—why do you have such ideas?’ cried Caderousse; ‘or, if
you have them, why don’t you keep them to yourself?’

“‘Well,’ said La Carconte, after a moment’s pause, ‘you are not a man.’

“‘What do you mean?’ added Caderousse.

“‘If you had been a man, you would not have let him go from here.’

“‘Woman!’

“‘Or else he should not have reached Beaucaire.’

“‘Woman!’

“‘The road takes a turn—he is obliged to follow it—while alongside of
the canal there is a shorter road.’

“‘Woman!—you offend the good God. There—listen!’

And at this moment there was a tremendous peal of thunder, while the
livid lightning illumined the room, and the thunder, rolling away in
the distance, seemed to withdraw unwillingly from the cursed abode.
‘Mercy!’ said Caderousse, crossing himself.

20312m



“At the same moment, and in the midst of the terrifying silence which
usually follows a clap of thunder, 