 threw him so heavily that all the Greeks
cheered him—if he is still such, and were to come near these suitors,
they would have a short shrift and a sorry wedding. As regards your
question, however, I will not prevaricate nor deceive you, but what the
old man of the sea told me, so much will I tell you in full. He said he
could see Ulysses on an island sorrowing bitterly in the house of the
nymph Calypso, who was keeping him prisoner, and he could not reach his
home, for he had no ships nor sailors to take him over the sea.’ This
was what Menelaus told me, and when I had heard his story I came away;
the gods then gave me a fair wind and soon brought me safe home again.”

With these words he moved the heart of Penelope. Then Theoclymenus said
to her:

“Madam, wife of Ulysses, Telemachus does not understand these things;
listen therefore to me, for I can divine them surely, and will hide
nothing from you. May Jove the king of heaven be my witness, and the
rites of hospitality, with that hearth of Ulysses to which I now come,
that Ulysses himself is even now in Ithaca, and, either going about the
country or staying in one place, is enquiring into all these evil deeds
and preparing a day of reckoning for the suitors. I saw an omen when I
was on the ship which meant this, and I told Telemachus about it.”

“May it be even so,” answered Penelope; “if your words come true, you
shall have such gifts and such good will from me that all who see you
shall congratulate you.”

Thus did they converse. Meanwhile the suitors were throwing discs, or
aiming with spears at a mark on the levelled ground in front of the
house, and behaving with all their old insolence. But when it was now
time for dinner, and the flock of sheep and goats had come into the
town from all the country round, 140 with their shepherds as usual,
then Medon, who was their favourite servant, and who waited upon them
at table, said, “Now then, my young masters, you have had enough sport,
so come inside that we may get dinner ready. Dinner is not a bad thing,
at dinner time.”

They left their sports as he told them, and when they were within the
house, they laid their cloaks on the benches and seats inside, and then
sacrificed some sheep, goats, pigs, and a heifer, all of them fat and
well grown.141 Thus they made ready for their meal. In the meantime
Ulysses and the swineherd were about starting for the town, and the
swineherd said, “Stranger, I suppose you still want to go to town
to-day, as my master said you were to do; for my own part I should have
liked you to stay here as a station hand, but I must do as my master
tells me, or he will scold me later on, and a scolding from one’s
master is a very serious thing. Let us then be off, for it is now broad
day; it will be night again directly and then you will find it
colder.”142

“I know, and understand you,” replied Ulysses; “you need say no more.
Let us be going, but if you have a stick ready cut, let me have it to
walk with, for you say the road is a very rough one.”

As he spoke he threw his shabby old tattered wallet over his shoulders,
by the cord from which it hung, and Eumaeus gave him a stick to his
liking. The two then started, leaving the station in charge of the dogs
and herdsmen who remained behind; the swineherd led the way and his
master followed after, looking like some broken down old tramp as he
leaned upon his staff, and his clothes were all in rags. When they had
got over the rough steep ground and were nearing the city, they reached
the fountain from which the citizens drew their water. This had been
made by Ithacus, Neritus, and Polyctor. There was a grove of
water-loving poplars planted in a circle all round it, and the clear
cold water came down to it from a rock high up,143 while above the
fountain there was an altar to the nymphs, at which all wayfarers used
to sacrifice. Here Melanthius son of Dolius overtook them as he was
driving 