red light of the logs
made the elephants look as though they had been dipped in blood too,
Machua Appa, the head of all the drivers of all the Keddahs--Machua
Appa, Petersen Sahib’s other self, who had never seen a made road in
forty years: Machua Appa, who was so great that he had no other name
than Machua Appa,--leaped to his feet, with Little Toomai held high in
the air above his head, and shouted: “Listen, my brothers. Listen, too,
you my lords in the lines there, for I, Machua Appa, am speaking! This
little one shall no more be called Little Toomai, but Toomai of the
Elephants, as his great-grandfather was called before him. What never
man has seen he has seen through the long night, and the favor of the
elephant-folk and of the Gods of the Jungles is with him. He shall
become a great tracker. He shall become greater than I, even I, Machua
Appa! He shall follow the new trail, and the stale trail, and the mixed
trail, with a clear eye! He shall take no harm in the Keddah when he
runs under their bellies to rope the wild tuskers; and if he slips
before the feet of the charging bull elephant, the bull elephant
shall know who he is and shall not crush him. Aihai! my lords in the
chains,”--he whirled up the line of pickets--“here is the little one
that has seen your dances in your hidden places,--the sight that never
man saw! Give him honor, my lords! Salaam karo, my children. Make your
salute to Toomai of the Elephants! Gunga Pershad, ahaa! Hira Guj, Birchi
Guj, Kuttar Guj, ahaa! Pudmini,--thou hast seen him at the dance, and
thou too, Kala Nag, my pearl among elephants!--ahaa! Together! To Toomai
of the Elephants. Barrao!”

And at that last wild yell the whole line flung up their trunks till the
tips touched their foreheads, and broke out into the full salute--the
crashing trumpet-peal that only the Viceroy of India hears, the Salaamut
of the Keddah.

But it was all for the sake of Little Toomai, who had seen what never
man had seen before--the dance of the elephants at night and alone in
the heart of the Garo hills!




Shiv and the Grasshopper

     (The song that Toomai’s mother sang to the baby)

     Shiv, who poured the harvest and made the winds to blow,
     Sitting at the doorways of a day of long ago,
     Gave to each his portion, food and toil and fate,
     From the King upon the _guddee_ to the Beggar at the gate.
        _All things made he--Shiva the Preserver.
        Mahadeo!  Mahadeo!  He made all,--
        Thorn for the camel, fodder for the kine,
        And mother’s heart for sleepy head, O little son of mine!_


     Wheat he gave to rich folk, millet to the poor,
     Broken scraps for holy men that beg from door to door;
     Battle to the tiger, carrion to the kite,
     And rags and bones to wicked wolves without the wall at night.
     Naught he found too lofty, none he saw too low--
     Parbati beside him watched them come and go;
     Thought to cheat her husband, turning Shiv to jest--
     Stole the little grasshopper and hid it in her breast.
        _So she tricked him, Shiva the Preserver.
        Mahadeo!  Mahadeo!  Turn and see.
        Tall are the camels, heavy are the kine,
        But this was Least of Little Things, O little son of mine!_

     When the dole was ended, laughingly she said,
     “Master, of a million mouths, is not one unfed?”
      Laughing, Shiv made answer, “All have had their part,
     Even he, the little one, hidden ’neath thy heart.”
      From her breast she plucked it, Parbati the thief,
     Saw the Least of Little Things gnawed a new-grown leaf!
     Saw and feared and wondered, making prayer to Shiv,
     Who hath surely given meat to all that live.
        _All things made he--Shiva the Preserver.
        Mahadeo!  Mahadeo!  He made all,--
        Thorn for the camel, fodder for the kine,
        And mother’s heart for sleepy head, O little son of mine!_




Her Majesty’s S