sorry to learn how to act on such an occasion. He therefore
promised Albert that he would content himself the morrow with
witnessing the Carnival from the windows of the Rospoli Palace.

The next morning he saw Albert pass and repass, holding an enormous
bouquet, which he doubtless meant to make the bearer of his amorous
epistle. This belief was changed into certainty when Franz saw the
bouquet (conspicuous by a circle of white camellias) in the hand of a
charming harlequin dressed in rose-colored satin.

The evening was no longer joy, but delirium. Albert nothing doubted but
that the fair unknown would reply in the same manner. Franz anticipated
his wishes by saying that the noise fatigued him, and that he should
pass the next day in writing and looking over his journal. Albert was
not deceived, for the next evening Franz saw him enter triumphantly
shaking a folded paper which he held by one corner.

“Well,” said he, “was I mistaken?”

“She has answered you!” cried Franz.

“Read.”

This word was pronounced in a manner impossible to describe. Franz took
the letter, and read:

“Tuesday evening, at seven o’clock, descend from your carriage opposite
the Via dei Pontefici, and follow the Roman peasant who snatches your
torch from you. When you arrive at the first step of the church of San
Giacomo, be sure to fasten a knot of rose-colored ribbons to the
shoulder of your harlequin costume, in order that you may be
recognized. Until then you will not see me. —Constancy and Discretion.”

“Well,” asked he, when Franz had finished, “what do you think of that?”

“I think that the adventure is assuming a very agreeable appearance.”

“I think so, also,” replied Albert; “and I very much fear you will go
alone to the Duke of Bracciano’s ball.”

Franz and Albert had received that morning an invitation from the
celebrated Roman banker.

“Take care, Albert,” said Franz. “All the nobility of Rome will be
present, and if your fair _incognita_ belong to the higher class of
society, she must go there.”

“Whether she goes there or not, my opinion is still the same,” returned
Albert. “You have read the letter?”

“Yes.”

“You know how imperfectly the women of the _mezzo cito_ are educated in
Italy?” (This is the name of the lower class.)

“Yes.”

“Well, read the letter again. Look at the writing, and find if you can,
any blemish in the language or orthography.” The writing was, in
reality, charming, and the orthography irreproachable.

“You are born to good fortune,” said Franz, as he returned the letter.

“Laugh as much as you will,” replied Albert, “I am in love.”

“You alarm me,” cried Franz. “I see that I shall not only go alone to
the Duke of Bracciano’s, but also return to Florence alone.”

“If my unknown be as amiable as she is beautiful,” said Albert, “I
shall fix myself at Rome for six weeks, at least. I adore Rome, and I
have always had a great taste for archæology.”

20189m



“Come, two or three more such adventures, and I do not despair of
seeing you a member of the Academy.”

Doubtless Albert was about to discuss seriously his right to the
academic chair when they were informed that dinner was ready. Albert’s
love had not taken away his appetite. He hastened with Franz to seat
himself, free to recommence the discussion after dinner. After dinner,
the Count of Monte Cristo was announced. They had not seen him for two
days. Signor Pastrini informed them that business had called him to
Civita Vecchia. He had started the previous evening, and had only
returned an hour since. He was charming. Whether he kept a watch over
himself, or whether by accident he did not sound the acrimonious chords
that in other circumstances had been touched, he was tonight like
everybody else.

The man was an enigma to Franz. The count must feel sure that Franz
recognized him; and yet he had not let fall a single word indicating
any previous acquaintance between them. On h