ked, ‘How do they execute at Rome?’ and you reply, ‘I do not know!’
And, besides, they say that the culprit is an infamous scoundrel, who
killed with a log of wood a worthy canon who had brought him up like
his own son. _Diable!_ when a churchman is killed, it should be with a
different weapon than a log, especially when he has behaved like a
father. If you went to Spain, would you not see the bull-fights? Well,
suppose it is a bull-fight you are going to see? Recollect the ancient
Romans of the Circus, and the sports where they killed three hundred
lions and a hundred men. Think of the eighty thousand applauding
spectators, the sage matrons who took their daughters, and the charming
Vestals who made with the thumb of their white hands the fatal sign
that said, ‘Come, despatch the dying.’”

“Shall you go, then, Albert?” asked Franz.

“_Ma foi_, yes; like you, I hesitated, but the count’s eloquence
decides me.”

“Let us go, then,” said Franz, “since you wish it; but on our way to
the Piazza del Popolo, I wish to pass through the Corso. Is this
possible, count?”

“On foot, yes, in a carriage, no.”

“I will go on foot, then.”

“Is it important that you should go that way?”

“Yes, there is something I wish to see.”

“Well, we will go by the Corso. We will send the carriage to wait for
us on the Piazza del Popolo, by the Via del Babuino, for I shall be
glad to pass, myself, through the Corso, to see if some orders I have
given have been executed.”

“Excellency,” said a servant, opening the door, “a man in the dress of
a penitent wishes to speak to you.”

“Ah! yes,” returned the count, “I know who he is, gentlemen; will you
return to the salon? you will find good cigars on the centre table. I
will be with you directly.”

The young men rose and returned into the salon, while the count, again
apologizing, left by another door. Albert, who was a great smoker, and
who had considered it no small sacrifice to be deprived of the cigars
of the Café de Paris, approached the table, and uttered a cry of joy at
perceiving some veritable _puros_.

“Well,” asked Franz, “what think you of the Count of Monte Cristo?”

“What do I think?” said Albert, evidently surprised at such a question
from his companion; “I think he is a delightful fellow, who does the
honors of his table admirably; who has travelled much, read much, is,
like Brutus, of the Stoic school, and moreover,” added he, sending a
volume of smoke up towards the ceiling, “that he has excellent cigars.”

Such was Albert’s opinion of the count, and as Franz well knew that
Albert professed never to form an opinion except upon long reflection,
he made no attempt to change it.

“But,” said he, “did you observe one very singular thing?”

“What?”

“How attentively he looked at you.”

“At me?”

“Yes.”

Albert reflected. “Ah,” replied he, sighing, “that is not very
surprising; I have been more than a year absent from Paris, and my
clothes are of a most antiquated cut; the count takes me for a
provincial. The first opportunity you have, undeceive him, I beg, and
tell him I am nothing of the kind.”

Franz smiled; an instant after the count entered.

“I am now quite at your service, gentlemen,” said he. “The carriage is
going one way to the Piazza del Popolo, and we will go another; and, if
you please, by the Corso. Take some more of these cigars, M. de
Morcerf.”

“With all my heart,” returned Albert; “Italian cigars are horrible.
When you come to Paris, I will return all this.”

“I will not refuse; I intend going there soon, and since you allow me,
I will pay you a visit. Come, we have not any time to lose, it is
half-past twelve—let us set off.”

All three descended; the coachman received his master’s orders, and
drove down the Via del Babuino. While the three gentlemen walked along
the Piazza di Spagna and the Via Frattina, which led directly between
the Fiano and Rospoli palaces, Franz’s attention was dir