 join
your sister Valentine in dear grandpapa Noirtier’s room.”

“The album,” said Edward sulkily.

“What do you mean?—the album!”

“I want the album.”

“How dare you tear out the drawings?”

“Oh, it amuses me.”

“Go—go at once.”

“I won’t go unless you give me the album,” said the boy, seating
himself doggedly in an armchair, according to his habit of never giving
way.

“Take it, then, and pray disturb us no longer,” said Madame de
Villefort, giving the album to Edward, who then went towards the door,
led by his mother. The count followed her with his eyes.

“Let us see if she shuts the door after him,” he muttered.

Madame de Villefort closed the door carefully after the child, the
count appearing not to notice her; then casting a scrutinizing glance
around the chamber, the young wife returned to her chair, in which she
seated herself.

“Allow me to observe, madame,” said the count, with that kind tone he
could assume so well, “you are really very severe with that dear clever
child.”

“Oh, sometimes severity is quite necessary,” replied Madame de
Villefort, with all a mother’s real firmness.

“It was his Cornelius Nepos that Master Edward was repeating when he
referred to King Mithridates,” continued the count, “and you
interrupted him in a quotation which proves that his tutor has by no
means neglected him, for your son is really advanced for his years.”

“The fact is, count,” answered the mother, agreeably flattered, “he has
great aptitude, and learns all that is set before him. He has but one
fault, he is somewhat wilful; but really, on referring for the moment
to what he said, do you truly believe that Mithridates used these
precautions, and that these precautions were efficacious?”

“I think so, madame, because I myself have made use of them, that I
might not be poisoned at Naples, at Palermo, and at Smyrna—that is to
say, on three several occasions when, but for these precautions, I must
have lost my life.”

“And your precautions were successful?”

“Completely so.”

“Yes, I remember now your mentioning to me at Perugia something of this
sort.”

“Indeed?” said the count with an air of surprise, remarkably well
counterfeited; “I really did not remember.”

“I inquired of you if poisons acted equally, and with the same effect,
on men of the North as on men of the South; and you answered me that
the cold and sluggish habits of the North did not present the same
aptitude as the rich and energetic temperaments of the natives of the
South.”

“And that is the case,” observed Monte Cristo. “I have seen Russians
devour, without being visibly inconvenienced, vegetable substances
which would infallibly have killed a Neapolitan or an Arab.”

“And you really believe the result would be still more sure with us
than in the East, and in the midst of our fogs and rains a man would
habituate himself more easily than in a warm latitude to this
progressive absorption of poison?”

“Certainly; it being at the same time perfectly understood that he
should have been duly fortified against the poison to which he had not
been accustomed.”

“Yes, I understand that; and how would you habituate yourself, for
instance, or rather, how did you habituate yourself to it?”

“Oh, very easily. Suppose you knew beforehand the poison that would be
made use of against you; suppose the poison was, for instance,
brucine——”

“Brucine is extracted from the false angostura8 is it not?” inquired
Madame de Villefort.

“Precisely, madame,” replied Monte Cristo; “but I perceive I have not
much to teach you. Allow me to compliment you on your knowledge; such
learning is very rare among ladies.”

“Oh, I am aware of that,” said Madame de Villefort; “but I have a
passion for the occult sciences, which speak to the imagination like
poetry, and are reducible to figures, like an algebraic equation; but
go on, I beg of you; what you say interests me to the greatest degree.”

30