ce, M. Andrea Cavalcanti, with curled hair, moustaches
in perfect order, and white gloves which fitted admirably, had entered
the courtyard of the banker’s house in Rue de la Chaussée d’Antin. He
had not been more than ten minutes in the drawing-room before he drew
Danglars aside into the recess of a bow-window, and, after an ingenious
preamble, related to him all his anxieties and cares since his noble
father’s departure. He acknowledged the extreme kindness which had been
shown him by the banker’s family, in which he had been received as a
son, and where, besides, his warmest affections had found an object on
which to centre in Mademoiselle Danglars.

Danglars listened with the most profound attention; he had expected
this declaration for the last two or three days, and when at last it
came his eyes glistened as much as they had lowered on listening to
Morcerf. He would not, however, yield immediately to the young man’s
request, but made a few conscientious objections.

“Are you not rather young, M. Andrea, to think of marrying?”

“I think not, sir,” replied M. Cavalcanti; “in Italy the nobility
generally marry young. Life is so uncertain, that we ought to secure
happiness while it is within our reach.”

“Well, sir,” said Danglars, “in case your proposals, which do me honor,
are accepted by my wife and daughter, by whom shall the preliminary
arrangements be settled? So important a negotiation should, I think, be
conducted by the respective fathers of the young people.”

“Sir, my father is a man of great foresight and prudence. Thinking that
I might wish to settle in France, he left me at his departure, together
with the papers establishing my identity, a letter promising, if he
approved of my choice, 150,000 livres per annum from the day I was
married. So far as I can judge, I suppose this to be a quarter of my
father’s revenue.”

“I,” said Danglars, “have always intended giving my daughter 500,000
francs as her dowry; she is, besides, my sole heiress.”

“All would then be easily arranged if the baroness and her daughter are
willing. We should command an annuity of 175,000 livres. Supposing,
also, I should persuade the marquis to give me my capital, which is not
likely, but still is possible, we would place these two or three
millions in your hands, whose talent might make it realize ten per
cent.”

“I never give more than four per cent, and generally only three and a
half; but to my son-in-law I would give five, and we would share the
profits.”

“Very good, father-in-law,” said Cavalcanti, yielding to his low-born
nature, which would escape sometimes through the aristocratic gloss
with which he sought to conceal it. Correcting himself immediately, he
said, “Excuse me, sir; hope alone makes me almost mad,—what will not
reality do?”

“But,” said Danglars, who, on his part, did not perceive how soon the
conversation, which was at first disinterested, was turning to a
business transaction, “there is, doubtless, a part of your fortune your
father could not refuse you?”

“Which?” asked the young man.

“That you inherit from your mother.”

“Truly, from my mother, Leonora Corsinari.”

“How much may it amount to?”

“Indeed, sir,” said Andrea, “I assure you I have never given the
subject a thought, but I suppose it must have been at least two
millions.”

Danglars felt as much overcome with joy as the miser who finds a lost
treasure, or as the shipwrecked mariner who feels himself on solid
ground instead of in the abyss which he expected would swallow him up.

“Well, sir,” said Andrea, bowing to the banker respectfully, “may I
hope?”

“You may not only hope,” said Danglars, “but consider it a settled
thing, if no obstacle arises on your part.”

“I am, indeed, rejoiced,” said Andrea.

“But,” said Danglars thoughtfully, “how is it that your patron, M. de
Monte Cristo, did not make his proposal for you?”

Andrea blushed imperceptibly.

“I have just l