“Now, just tell me who the devil should know in France that the officer
Fernand and the Count of Morcerf are one and the same person? and who
cares now about Yanina, which was taken as long ago as the year 1822 or
1823?”

“That just shows the meanness of this slander. They have allowed all
this time to elapse, and then all of a sudden rake up events which have
been forgotten to furnish materials for scandal, in order to tarnish
the lustre of our high position. I inherit my father’s name, and I do
not choose that the shadow of disgrace should darken it. I am going to
Beauchamp, in whose journal this paragraph appears, and I shall insist
on his retracting the assertion before two witnesses.”

“Beauchamp will never retract.”

“Then we must fight.”

“No you will not, for he will tell you, what is very true, that perhaps
there were fifty officers in the Greek army bearing the same name.”

“We will fight, nevertheless. I will efface that blot on my father’s
character. My father, who was such a brave soldier, whose career was so
brilliant——”

“Oh, well, he will add, ‘We are warranted in believing that this
Fernand is not the illustrious Count of Morcerf, who also bears the
same Christian name.’”

“I am determined not to be content with anything short of an entire
retractation.”

“And you intend to make him do it in the presence of two witnesses, do
you?”

“Yes.”

“You do wrong.”

“Which means, I suppose, that you refuse the service which I asked of
you?”

“You know my theory regarding duels; I told you my opinion on that
subject, if you remember, when we were at Rome.”

“Nevertheless, my dear count, I found you this morning engaged in an
occupation but little consistent with the notions you profess to
entertain.”

“Because, my dear fellow, you understand one must never be eccentric.
If one’s lot is cast among fools, it is necessary to study folly. I
shall perhaps find myself one day called out by some harebrained scamp,
who has no more real cause of quarrel with me than you have with
Beauchamp; he may take me to task for some foolish trifle or other, he
will bring his witnesses, or will insult me in some public place, and I
am expected to kill him for all that.”

“You admit that you would fight, then? Well, if so, why do you object
to my doing so?”

“I do not say that you ought not to fight, I only say that a duel is a
serious thing, and ought not to be undertaken without due reflection.”

“Did he reflect before he insulted my father?”

“If he spoke hastily, and owns that he did so, you ought to be
satisfied.”

“Ah, my dear count, you are far too indulgent.”

“And you are far too exacting. Supposing, for instance, and do not be
angry at what I am going to say——”

“Well.”

“Supposing the assertion to be really true?”

“A son ought not to submit to such a stain on his father’s honor.”

“_Ma foi!_ we live in times when there is much to which we must
submit.”

“That is precisely the fault of the age.”

“And do you undertake to reform it?”

“Yes, as far as I am personally concerned.”

“Well, you are indeed exacting, my dear fellow!”

“Yes, I own it.”

“Are you quite impervious to good advice?”

“Not when it comes from a friend.”

“And do you account me that title?”

“Certainly I do.”

“Well, then, before going to Beauchamp with your witnesses, seek
further information on the subject.”

“From whom?”

“From Haydée.”

“Why, what can be the use of mixing a woman up in the affair?—what can
she do in it?”

“She can declare to you, for example, that your father had no hand
whatever in the defeat and death of the vizier; or if by chance he had,
indeed, the misfortune to——”

“I have told you, my dear count, that I would not for one moment admit
of such a proposition.”

“You reject this means of information, then?”

“I do—most decidedly.”

“Then let me offer one more word of advice.”

“Do so, then, but let it be the last.”

“Y