069m



“Well,” replied Monte Cristo “suppose, then, that this poison was
brucine, and you were to take a milligramme the first day, two
milligrammes the second day, and so on. Well, at the end of ten days
you would have taken a centigramme, at the end of twenty days,
increasing another milligramme, you would have taken three hundred
centigrammes; that is to say, a dose which you would support without
inconvenience, and which would be very dangerous for any other person
who had not taken the same precautions as yourself. Well, then, at the
end of a month, when drinking water from the same carafe, you would
kill the person who drank with you, without your perceiving, otherwise
than from slight inconvenience, that there was any poisonous substance
mingled with this water.”

“Do you know any other counter-poisons?”

“I do not.”

“I have often read, and read again, the history of Mithridates,” said
Madame de Villefort in a tone of reflection, “and had always considered
it a fable.”

“No, madame, contrary to most history, it is true; but what you tell
me, madame, what you inquire of me, is not the result of a chance
query, for two years ago you asked me the same questions, and said
then, that for a very long time this history of Mithridates had
occupied your mind.”

“True, sir. The two favorite studies of my youth were botany and
mineralogy, and subsequently, when I learned that the use of simples
frequently explained the whole history of a people, and the entire life
of individuals in the East, as flowers betoken and symbolize a love
affair, I have regretted that I was not a man, that I might have been a
Flamel, a Fontana, or a Cabanis.”

“And the more, madame,” said Monte Cristo, “as the Orientals do not
confine themselves, as did Mithridates, to make a cuirass of his
poisons, but they also made them a dagger. Science becomes, in their
hands, not only a defensive weapon, but still more frequently an
offensive one; the one serves against all their physical sufferings,
the other against all their enemies. With opium, belladonna, brucea,
snake-wood, and the cherry-laurel, they put to sleep all who stand in
their way. There is not one of those women, Egyptian, Turkish, or
Greek, whom here you call ‘good women,’ who do not know how, by means
of chemistry, to stupefy a doctor, and in psychology to amaze a
confessor.”

“Really,” said Madame de Villefort, whose eyes sparkled with strange
fire at this conversation.

“Oh, yes, indeed, madame,” continued Monte Cristo, “the secret dramas
of the East begin with a love philtre and end with a death potion—begin
with paradise and end with—hell. There are as many elixirs of every
kind as there are caprices and peculiarities in the physical and moral
nature of humanity; and I will say further—the art of these chemists is
capable with the utmost precision to accommodate and proportion the
remedy and the bane to yearnings for love or desires for vengeance.”

“But, sir,” remarked the young woman, “these Eastern societies, in the
midst of which you have passed a portion of your existence, are as
fantastic as the tales that come from their strange land. A man can
easily be put out of the way there, then; it is, indeed, the Bagdad and
Bassora of the _Thousand and One Nights_. The sultans and viziers who
rule over society there, and who constitute what in France we call the
government, are really Haroun-al-Raschids and Giaffars, who not only
pardon a poisoner, but even make him a prime minister, if his crime has
been an ingenious one, and who, under such circumstances, have the
whole story written in letters of gold, to divert their hours of
idleness and _ennui_.”

“By no means, madame; the fanciful exists no longer in the East. There,
disguised under other names, and concealed under other costumes, are
police agents, magistrates, attorneys-general, and bailiffs. They hang,
behead, and impale their criminals in the most agreeable