me, sir; let me live!”

“She is cowardly,” said Villefort.

“Reflect that I am your wife!”

“You are a poisoner.”

“In the name of Heaven!”

“No!”

“In the name of the love you once bore me!”

“No, no!”

“In the name of our child! Ah, for the sake of our child, let me live!”

50167m



“No, no, no, I tell you; one day, if I allow you to live, you will
perhaps kill him, as you have the others!”

“I?—I kill my boy?” cried the distracted mother, rushing toward
Villefort; “I kill my son? Ha, ha, ha!” and a frightful, demoniac laugh
finished the sentence, which was lost in a hoarse rattle.

Madame de Villefort fell at her husband’s feet. He approached her.

“Think of it, madame,” he said; “if, on my return, justice has not been
satisfied, I will denounce you with my own mouth, and arrest you with
my own hands!”

She listened, panting, overwhelmed, crushed; her eye alone lived, and
glared horribly.

“Do you understand me?” he said. “I am going down there to pronounce
the sentence of death against a murderer. If I find you alive on my
return, you shall sleep tonight in the conciergerie.”

Madame de Villefort sighed; her nerves gave way, and she sunk on the
carpet. The king’s attorney seemed to experience a sensation of pity;
he looked upon her less severely, and, bowing to her, said slowly:

“Farewell, madame, farewell!”

That farewell struck Madame de Villefort like the executioner’s knife.
She fainted. The procureur went out, after having double-locked the
door.



 Chapter 109. The Assizes

The Benedetto affair, as it was called at the Palais, and by people in
general, had produced a tremendous sensation. Frequenting the Café de
Paris, the Boulevard de Gand, and the Bois de Boulogne, during his
brief career of splendor, the false Cavalcanti had formed a host of
acquaintances. The papers had related his various adventures, both as
the man of fashion and the galley-slave; and as everyone who had been
personally acquainted with Prince Andrea Cavalcanti experienced a
lively curiosity in his fate, they all determined to spare no trouble
in endeavoring to witness the trial of M. Benedetto for the murder of
his comrade in chains.

In the eyes of many, Benedetto appeared, if not a victim to, at least
an instance of, the fallibility of the law. M. Cavalcanti, his father,
had been seen in Paris, and it was expected that he would re-appear to
claim the illustrious outcast. Many, also, who were not aware of the
circumstances attending his withdrawal from Paris, were struck with the
worthy appearance, the gentlemanly bearing, and the knowledge of the
world displayed by the old patrician, who certainly played the nobleman
very well, so long as he said nothing, and made no arithmetical
calculations.

As for the accused himself, many remembered him as being so amiable, so
handsome, and so liberal, that they chose to think him the victim of
some conspiracy, since in this world large fortunes frequently excite
the malevolence and jealousy of some unknown enemy.

Everyone, therefore, ran to the court; some to witness the sight,
others to comment upon it. From seven o’clock in the morning a crowd
was stationed at the iron gates, and an hour before the trial commenced
the hall was full of the privileged. Before the entrance of the
magistrates, and indeed frequently afterwards, a court of justice, on
days when some especial trial is to take place, resembles a
drawing-room where many persons recognize each other and converse if
they can do so without losing their seats; or, if they are separated by
too great a number of lawyers, communicate by signs.

It was one of the magnificent autumn days which make amends for a short
summer; the clouds which M. de Villefort had perceived at sunrise had
all disappeared as if by magic, and one of the softest and most
brilliant days of September shone forth in all its splendor.

Beauchamp, one of the kings of the press, an