ucien,—and, considering
that this remark was all that he was at that time called upon to make,
he adjusted the glass to his eye, and biting the top of his gold headed
cane, began to make the tour of the apartment, examining the arms and
the pictures.

“Ah,” said Monte Cristo “I did not expect that the affair would be so
promptly concluded.”

“Oh, things take their course without our assistance. While we are
forgetting them, they are falling into their appointed order; and when,
again, our attention is directed to them, we are surprised at the
progress they have made towards the proposed end. My father and M.
Danglars served together in Spain, my father in the army and M.
Danglars in the commissariat department. It was there that my father,
ruined by the revolution, and M. Danglars, who never had possessed any
patrimony, both laid the foundations of their different fortunes.”

“Yes,” said Monte Cristo “I think M. Danglars mentioned that in a visit
which I paid him; and,” continued he, casting a side-glance at Lucien,
who was turning over the leaves of an album, “Mademoiselle Eugénie is
pretty—I think I remember that to be her name.”

“Very pretty, or rather, very beautiful,” replied Albert, “but of that
style of beauty which I do not appreciate; I am an ungrateful fellow.”

“You speak as if you were already her husband.”

“Ah,” returned Albert, in his turn looking around to see what Lucien
was doing.

“Really,” said Monte Cristo, lowering his voice, “you do not appear to
me to be very enthusiastic on the subject of this marriage.”

“Mademoiselle Danglars is too rich for me,” replied Morcerf, “and that
frightens me.”

“Bah,” exclaimed Monte Cristo, “that’s a fine reason to give. Are you
not rich yourself?”

“My father’s income is about 50,000 francs per annum; and he will give
me, perhaps, ten or twelve thousand when I marry.”

“That, perhaps, might not be considered a large sum, in Paris
especially,” said the count; “but everything does not depend on wealth,
and it is a fine thing to have a good name, and to occupy a high
station in society. Your name is celebrated, your position magnificent;
and then the Comte de Morcerf is a soldier, and it is pleasing to see
the integrity of a Bayard united to the poverty of a Duguesclin;
disinterestedness is the brightest ray in which a noble sword can
shine. As for me, I consider the union with Mademoiselle Danglars a
most suitable one; she will enrich you, and you will ennoble her.”

Albert shook his head, and looked thoughtful.

“There is still something else,” said he.

“I confess,” observed Monte Cristo, “that I have some difficulty in
comprehending your objection to a young lady who is both rich and
beautiful.”

“Oh,” said Morcerf, “this repugnance, if repugnance it may be called,
is not all on my side.”

“Whence can it arise, then? for you told me your father desired the
marriage.”

“It is my mother who dissents; she has a clear and penetrating
judgment, and does not smile on the proposed union. I cannot account
for it, but she seems to entertain some prejudice against the
Danglars.”

30107m



“Ah,” said the count, in a somewhat forced tone, “that may be easily
explained; the Comtesse de Morcerf, who is aristocracy and refinement
itself, does not relish the idea of being allied by your marriage with
one of ignoble birth; that is natural enough.”

“I do not know if that is her reason,” said Albert, “but one thing I do
know, that if this marriage be consummated, it will render her quite
miserable. There was to have been a meeting six weeks ago in order to
talk over and settle the affair; but I had such a sudden attack of
indisposition——”

“Real?” interrupted the count, smiling.

“Oh, real enough, from anxiety doubtless,—at any rate they postponed
the matter for two months. There is no hurry, you know. I am not yet
twenty-one, and Eugénie is only seventeen; but the two months expire
next week. I