est rustling of the
foliage, the least whistling of the wind, attracted his attention, and
drew the perspiration to his brow; then he tremblingly fixed his
ladder, and, not to lose a moment, placed his foot on the first step.
Amidst all these alternations of hope and fear, the clock struck ten.
“It is impossible,” said Maximilian, “that the signing of a contract
should occupy so long a time without unexpected interruptions. I have
weighed all the chances, calculated the time required for all the
forms; something must have happened.”

And then he walked rapidly to and fro, and pressed his burning forehead
against the fence. Had Valentine fainted? or had she been discovered
and stopped in her flight? These were the only obstacles which appeared
possible to the young man.

The idea that her strength had failed her in attempting to escape, and
that she had fainted in one of the paths, was the one that most
impressed itself upon his mind. “In that case,” said he, “I should lose
her, and by my own fault.” He dwelt on this idea for a moment, then it
appeared reality. He even thought he could perceive something on the
ground at a distance; he ventured to call, and it seemed to him that
the wind wafted back an almost inarticulate sigh.

At last the half-hour struck. It was impossible to wait longer, his
temples throbbed violently, his eyes were growing dim; he passed one
leg over the wall, and in a moment leaped down on the other side. He
was on Villefort’s premises—had arrived there by scaling the wall. What
might be the consequences? However, he had not ventured thus far to
draw back. He followed a short distance close under the wall, then
crossed a path, hid entered a clump of trees. In a moment he had passed
through them, and could see the house distinctly.

30341m



Then Morrel saw that he had been right in believing that the house was
not illuminated. Instead of lights at every window, as is customary on
days of ceremony, he saw only a gray mass, which was veiled also by a
cloud, which at that moment obscured the moon’s feeble light. A light
moved rapidly from time to time past three windows of the second floor.
These three windows were in Madame de Saint-Méran’s room. Another
remained motionless behind some red curtains which were in Madame de
Villefort’s bedroom. Morrel guessed all this. So many times, in order
to follow Valentine in thought at every hour in the day, had he made
her describe the whole house, that without having seen it he knew it
all.

This darkness and silence alarmed Morrel still more than Valentine’s
absence had done. Almost mad with grief, and determined to venture
everything in order to see Valentine once more, and be certain of the
misfortune he feared, Morrel gained the edge of the clump of trees, and
was going to pass as quickly as possible through the flower-garden,
when the sound of a voice, still at some distance, but which was borne
upon the wind, reached him. At this sound, as he was already partially
exposed to view, he stepped back and concealed himself completely,
remaining perfectly motionless.

He had formed his resolution. If it was Valentine alone, he would speak
as she passed; if she was accompanied, and he could not speak, still he
should see her, and know that she was safe; if they were strangers, he
would listen to their conversation, and might understand something of
this hitherto incomprehensible mystery.

The moon had just then escaped from behind the cloud which had
concealed it, and Morrel saw Villefort come out upon the steps,
followed by a gentleman in black. They descended, and advanced towards
the clump of trees, and Morrel soon recognized the other gentleman as
Doctor d’Avrigny.

30339m



The young man, seeing them approach, drew back mechanically, until he
found himself stopped by a sycamore-tree in the centre of the clump;
there he was compelled to remain. Soon the two gentlemen stopped also.

“Ah