
Mowgli spread the skin out on the flat stone where Akela used to sit,
and pegged it down with four slivers of bamboo, and Akela lay down upon
it, and called the old call to the Council, “Look--look well, O Wolves,”
 exactly as he had called when Mowgli was first brought there.

Ever since Akela had been deposed, the Pack had been without a leader,
hunting and fighting at their own pleasure. But they answered the call
from habit; and some of them were lame from the traps they had fallen
into, and some limped from shot wounds, and some were mangy from eating
bad food, and many were missing. But they came to the Council Rock, all
that were left of them, and saw Shere Khan’s striped hide on the rock,
and the huge claws dangling at the end of the empty dangling feet. It
was then that Mowgli made up a song that came up into his throat all
by itself, and he shouted it aloud, leaping up and down on the rattling
skin, and beating time with his heels till he had no more breath left,
while Gray Brother and Akela howled between the verses.

“Look well, O Wolves. Have I kept my word?” said Mowgli. And the wolves
bayed “Yes,” and one tattered wolf howled:

“Lead us again, O Akela. Lead us again, O Man-cub, for we be sick of
this lawlessness, and we would be the Free People once more.”

“Nay,” purred Bagheera, “that may not be. When ye are full-fed, the
madness may come upon you again. Not for nothing are ye called the Free
People. Ye fought for freedom, and it is yours. Eat it, O Wolves.”

“Man-Pack and Wolf-Pack have cast me out,” said Mowgli. “Now I will hunt
alone in the jungle.”

“And we will hunt with thee,” said the four cubs.

So Mowgli went away and hunted with the four cubs in the jungle from
that day on. But he was not always alone, because, years afterward, he
became a man and married.

But that is a story for grown-ups.




Mowgli’s Song

     THAT HE SANG AT THE COUNCIL ROCK WHEN HE
     DANCED ON SHERE KHAN’S HIDE

The Song of Mowgli—I, Mowgli, am singing. Let the jungle listen to the
things I have done.
Shere Khan said he would kill—would kill! At the gates in the twilight
he would kill Mowgli, the Frog!
He ate and he drank. Drink deep, Shere Khan, for when wilt thou drink
again? Sleep and dream of the kill.
I am alone on the grazing-grounds. Gray Brother, come to me! Come to
me, Lone Wolf, for there is big game afoot!
Bring up the great bull buffaloes, the blue-skinned herd bulls with the
angry eyes. Drive them to and fro as I order.
Sleepest thou still, Shere Khan? Wake, oh, wake! Here come I, and the
bulls are behind.
Rama, the King of the Buffaloes, stamped with his foot. Waters of the
Waingunga, whither went Shere Khan?
He is not Ikki to dig holes, nor Mao, the Peacock, that he should fly.
He is not Mang the Bat, to hang in the branches. Little bamboos that
creak together, tell me where he ran?
_Ow!_ He is there. _Ahoo!_ He is there. Under the feet of Rama lies the
Lame One! Up, Shere Khan!
Up and kill! Here is meat; break the necks of the bulls!
_Hsh!_ He is asleep. We will not wake him, for his strength is very
great. The kites have come down to see it. The black ants have come up
to know it. There is a great assembly in his honor.
_Alala!_ I have no cloth to wrap me. The kites will see that I am
naked. I am ashamed to meet all these people.
Lend me thy coat, Shere Khan. Lend me thy gay striped coat that I may
go to the Council Rock.
By the Bull that bought me I made a promise—a little promise. Only thy
coat is lacking before I keep my word.
With the knife, with the knife that men use, with the knife of the
hunter, I will stoop down for my gift.
Waters of the Waingunga, Shere Khan gives me his coat for the love that
he bears me. Pull, Gray Brother! Pull, Akela! Heavy is the hide of
Shere Khan.
The Man Pack are angry. They throw stones and talk child’s talk. My
mouth is bleeding. Let me run away.
Through the night, through the hot night, 