what right, sir?”

“By right of the objections you have raised, and the explanations you
have demanded, which certainly must have some motive.”

Once more Danglars bit his lips. It was the second time he had been
worsted, and this time on his own ground. His forced politeness sat
awkwardly upon him, and approached almost to impertinence. Monte Cristo
on the contrary, preserved a graceful suavity of demeanor, aided by a
certain degree of simplicity he could assume at pleasure, and thus
possessed the advantage.

“Well, sir,” resumed Danglars, after a brief silence, “I will endeavor
to make myself understood, by requesting you to inform me for what sum
you propose to draw upon me?”

“Why, truly,” replied Monte Cristo, determined not to lose an inch of
the ground he had gained, “my reason for desiring an ‘unlimited’ credit
was precisely because I did not know how much money I might need.”

The banker thought the time had come for him to take the upper hand. So
throwing himself back in his armchair, he said, with an arrogant and
purse-proud air:

“Let me beg of you not to hesitate in naming your wishes; you will then
be convinced that the resources of the house of Danglars, however
limited, are still equal to meeting the largest demands; and were you
even to require a million——”

“I beg your pardon,” interposed Monte Cristo.

“I said a million,” replied Danglars, with the confidence of ignorance.

“But could I do with a million?” retorted the count. “My dear sir, if a
trifle like that could suffice me, I should never have given myself the
trouble of opening an account. A million? Excuse my smiling when you
speak of a sum I am in the habit of carrying in my pocket-book or
dressing-case.”

And with these words Monte Cristo took from his pocket a small case
containing his visiting-cards, and drew forth two orders on the
treasury for 500,000 francs each, payable at sight to the bearer. A man
like Danglars was wholly inaccessible to any gentler method of
correction. The effect of the present revelation was stunning; he
trembled and was on the verge of apoplexy. The pupils of his eyes, as
he gazed at Monte Cristo dilated horribly.

“Come, come,” said Monte Cristo, “confess honestly that you have not
perfect confidence in Thomson & French. I understand, and foreseeing
that such might be the case, I took, in spite of my ignorance of
affairs, certain precautions. See, here are two similar letters to that
you have yourself received; one from the house of Arstein & Eskeles of
Vienna, to Baron Rothschild, the other drawn by Baring of London, upon
M. Lafitte. Now, sir, you have but to say the word, and I will spare
you all uneasiness by presenting my letter of credit to one or other of
these two firms.”

The blow had struck home, and Danglars was entirely vanquished; with a
trembling hand he took the two letters from the count, who held them
carelessly between finger and thumb, and proceeded to scrutinize the
signatures, with a minuteness that the count might have regarded as
insulting, had it not suited his present purpose to mislead the banker.

“Oh, sir,” said Danglars, after he had convinced himself of the
authenticity of the documents he held, and rising as if to salute the
power of gold personified in the man before him,—“three letters of
unlimited credit! I can be no longer mistrustful, but you must pardon
me, my dear count, for confessing to some degree of astonishment.”

“Nay,” answered Monte Cristo, with the most gentlemanly air, “’tis not
for such trifling sums as these that your banking house is to be
incommoded. Then, you can let me have some money, can you not?”

“Whatever you say, my dear count; I am at your orders.”

“Why,” replied Monte Cristo, “since we mutually understand each
other—for such I presume is the case?” Danglars bowed assentingly. “You
are quite sure that not a lurking doubt or suspicion lingers in your
mind?”

“Oh, my dear count,” exc