been the dupe of the Cavalcanti, who, it appears,
presented themselves to him with false letters of credit, and cheated
him out of 100,000 francs upon the hypothesis of this principality.”

“By the way, M. de Château-Renaud,” asked Beauchamp, “how is Morrel?”

“_Ma foi_, I have called three times without once seeing him. Still,
his sister did not seem uneasy, and told me that though she had not
seen him for two or three days, she was sure he was well.”

“Ah, now I think of it, the Count of Monte Cristo cannot appear in the
hall,” said Beauchamp.

“Why not?”

“Because he is an actor in the drama.”

“Has he assassinated anyone, then?”

“No, on the contrary, they wished to assassinate him. You know that it
was in leaving his house that M. de Caderousse was murdered by his
friend Benedetto. You know that the famous waistcoat was found in his
house, containing the letter which stopped the signature of the
marriage-contract. Do you see the waistcoat? There it is, all
blood-stained, on the desk, as a testimony of the crime.”

“Ah, very good.”

“Hush, gentlemen, here is the court; let us go back to our places.”

A noise was heard in the hall; the sergeant called his two patrons with
an energetic “hem!” and the door-keeper appearing, called out with that
shrill voice peculiar to his order, ever since the days of
Beaumarchais:

“The court, gentlemen!”



 Chapter 110. The Indictment

The judges took their places in the midst of the most profound silence;
the jury took their seats; M. de Villefort, the object of unusual
attention, and we had almost said of general admiration, sat in the
armchair and cast a tranquil glance around him. Everyone looked with
astonishment on that grave and severe face, whose calm expression
personal griefs had been unable to disturb, and the aspect of a man who
was a stranger to all human emotions excited something very like
terror.

“Gendarmes,” said the president, “lead in the accused.”

At these words the public attention became more intense, and all eyes
were turned towards the door through which Benedetto was to enter. The
door soon opened and the accused appeared.

The same impression was experienced by all present, and no one was
deceived by the expression of his countenance. His features bore no
sign of that deep emotion which stops the beating of the heart and
blanches the cheek. His hands, gracefully placed, one upon his hat, the
other in the opening of his white waistcoat, were not at all tremulous;
his eye was calm and even brilliant. Scarcely had he entered the hall
when he glanced at the whole body of magistrates and assistants; his
eye rested longer on the president, and still more so on the king’s
attorney.

By the side of Andrea was stationed the lawyer who was to conduct his
defence, and who had been appointed by the court, for Andrea disdained
to pay any attention to those details, to which he appeared to attach
no importance. The lawyer was a young man with light hair whose face
expressed a hundred times more emotion than that which characterized
the prisoner.

50181m



The president called for the indictment, revised as we know, by the
clever and implacable pen of Villefort. During the reading of this,
which was long, the public attention was continually drawn towards
Andrea, who bore the inspection with Spartan unconcern. Villefort had
never been so concise and eloquent. The crime was depicted in the most
vivid colors; the former life of the prisoner, his transformation, a
review of his life from the earliest period, were set forth with all
the talent that a knowledge of human life could furnish to a mind like
that of the procureur. Benedetto was thus forever condemned in public
opinion before the sentence of the law could be pronounced.

Andrea paid no attention to the successive charges which were brought
against him. M. de Villefort, who examined him attentively, and who no
doubt practiced upon 