he way,” said the major, “you know I have only the 2,000 francs
which the Abbé Busoni sent me; this sum I have expended upon travelling
expenses, and——”

“And you want money; that is a matter of course, my dear M. Cavalcanti.
Well, here are 8,000 francs on account.”

The major’s eyes sparkled brilliantly.

“It is 40,000 francs which I now owe you,” said Monte Cristo.

“Does your excellency wish for a receipt?” said the major, at the same
time slipping the money into the inner pocket of his coat.

“For what?” said the count.

“I thought you might want it to show the Abbé Busoni.”

“Well, when you receive the remaining 40,000, you shall give me a
receipt in full. Between honest men such excessive precaution is, I
think, quite unnecessary.”

“Yes, so it is, between perfectly upright people.”

“One word more,” said Monte Cristo.

“Say on.”

“You will permit me to make one remark?”

“Certainly; pray do so.”

“Then I should advise you to leave off wearing that style of dress.”

“Indeed,” said the major, regarding himself with an air of complete
satisfaction.

“Yes. It may be worn at Via Reggio; but that costume, however elegant
in itself, has long been out of fashion in Paris.”

“That’s unfortunate.”

“Oh, if you really are attached to your old mode of dress; you can
easily resume it when you leave Paris.”

“But what shall I wear?”

“What you find in your trunks.”

“In my trunks? I have but one portmanteau.”

“I dare say you have nothing else with you. What is the use of boring
one’s self with so many things? Besides an old soldier always likes to
march with as little baggage as possible.”

“That is just the case—precisely so.”

“But you are a man of foresight and prudence, therefore you sent your
luggage on before you. It has arrived at the Hôtel des Princes, Rue de
Richelieu. It is there you are to take up your quarters.”

“Then, in these trunks——”

“I presume you have given orders to your valet de chambre to put in all
you are likely to need,—your plain clothes and your uniform. On grand
occasions you must wear your uniform; that will look very well. Do not
forget your crosses. They still laugh at them in France, and yet always
wear them, for all that.”

“Very well, very well,” said the major, who was in ecstasy at the
attention paid him by the count.

“Now,” said Monte Cristo, “that you have fortified yourself against all
painful excitement, prepare yourself, my dear M. Cavalcanti, to meet
your lost Andrea.”

Saying which Monte Cristo bowed, and disappeared behind the tapestry,
leaving the major fascinated beyond expression with the delightful
reception which he had received at the hands of the count.



 Chapter 56. Andrea Cavalcanti

The Count of Monte Cristo entered the adjoining room, which Baptistin
had designated as the drawing-room, and found there a young man, of
graceful demeanor and elegant appearance, who had arrived in a cab
about half an hour previously. Baptistin had not found any difficulty
in recognizing the person who presented himself at the door for
admittance. He was certainly the tall young man with light hair, red
beard, black eyes, and brilliant complexion, whom his master had so
particularly described to him. When the count entered the room the
young man was carelessly stretched on a sofa, tapping his boot with the
gold-headed cane which he held in his hand. On perceiving the count he
rose quickly.

“The Count of Monte Cristo, I believe?” said he.

“Yes, sir, and I think I have the honor of addressing Count Andrea
Cavalcanti?”

“Count Andrea Cavalcanti,” repeated the young man, accompanying his
words with a bow.

“You are charged with a letter of introduction addressed to me, are you
not?” said the count.

“I did not mention that, because the signature seemed to me so
strange.”

“The letter signed ‘Sinbad the Sailor,’ is it not?”

“Exactly so. Now, as I have never known any Sinbad, with the exce