they heard a knocking at the door.
Caderousse and his wife started and looked aghast at each other.

“‘Who’s there?’ cried Caderousse, rising, and drawing up in a heap the
gold and notes scattered over the table, and which he covered with his
two hands.

“‘It is I,’ shouted a voice.

“‘And who are you?’

“‘Eh, _pardieu!_ Joannes, the jeweller.’

“‘Well, and you said I offended the good God,’ said La Carconte with a
horrid smile. ‘Why, the good God sends him back again.’ Caderousse sank
pale and breathless into his chair.

“La Carconte, on the contrary, rose, and going with a firm step towards
the door, opened it, saying, as she did so:

“‘Come in, dear M. Joannes.’

“‘_Ma foi_,’ said the jeweller, drenched with rain, ‘I am not destined
to return to Beaucaire tonight. The shortest follies are best, my dear
Caderousse. You offered me hospitality, and I accept it, and have
returned to sleep beneath your friendly roof.’

“Caderousse stammered out something, while he wiped away the sweat that
started to his brow. La Carconte double-locked the door behind the
jeweller.”



 Chapter 45. The Rain of Blood

As the jeweller returned to the apartment, he cast around him a
scrutinizing glance—but there was nothing to excite suspicion, if it
did not exist, or to confirm it, if it were already awakened.
Caderousse’s hands still grasped the gold and bank-notes, and La
Carconte called up her sweetest smiles while welcoming the reappearance
of their guest.

“‘Well, well,’ said the jeweller, ‘you seem, my good friends, to have
had some fears respecting the accuracy of your money, by counting it
over so carefully directly I was gone.’

“‘Oh, no,’ answered Caderousse, ‘that was not my reason, I can assure
you; but the circumstances by which we have become possessed of this
wealth are so unexpected, as to make us scarcely credit our good
fortune, and it is only by placing the actual proof of our riches
before our eyes that we can persuade ourselves that the whole affair is
not a dream.’

“The jeweller smiled. ‘Have you any other guests in your house?’
inquired he.

“‘Nobody but ourselves,’ replied Caderousse; ‘the fact is, we do not
lodge travellers—indeed, our tavern is so near the town, that nobody
would think of stopping here.’

“‘Then I am afraid I shall very much inconvenience you.’

“‘Inconvenience us? Not at all, my dear sir,’ said La Carconte in her
most gracious manner. ‘Not at all, I assure you.’

“‘But where will you manage to stow me?’

“‘In the chamber overhead.’

“‘Surely that is where you yourselves sleep?’

“‘Never mind that; we have a second bed in the adjoining room.’

“Caderousse stared at his wife with much astonishment.

“The jeweller, meanwhile, was humming a song as he stood warming his
back at the fire La Carconte had kindled to dry the wet garments of her
guest; and this done, she next occupied herself in arranging his
supper, by spreading a napkin at the end of the table, and placing on
it the slender remains of their dinner, to which she added three or
four fresh-laid eggs. Caderousse had once more parted with his
treasure—the banknotes were replaced in the pocket-book, the gold put
back into the bag, and the whole carefully locked in the cupboard. He
then began pacing the room with a pensive and gloomy air, glancing from
time to time at the jeweller, who stood reeking with the steam from his
wet clothes, and merely changing his place on the warm hearth, to
enable the whole of his garments to be dried.

“‘There,’ said La Carconte, as she placed a bottle of wine on the
table, ‘supper is ready whenever you are.’

“‘And you?’ asked Joannes.

“‘I don’t want any supper,’ said Caderousse.

“‘We dined so very late,’ hastily interposed La Carconte.

“‘Then it seems I am to eat alone,’ remarked the jeweller.

“‘Oh, we shall have the pleasure of waiting upon you,’ answered La
Carconte, with an eager attention she was not accustomed 