

Time, which encrusts all physical substances with its mossy mantle, as
it invests all things of the mind with forgetfulness, seemed to have
respected these signs, which apparently had been made with some degree
of regularity, and probably with a definite purpose. Occasionally the
marks were hidden under tufts of myrtle, which spread into large bushes
laden with blossoms, or beneath parasitical lichen. So Edmond had to
separate the branches or brush away the moss to know where the
guide-marks were. The sight of marks renewed Edmond’s fondest hopes.
Might it not have been the cardinal himself who had first traced them,
in order that they might serve as a guide for his nephew in the event
of a catastrophe, which he could not foresee would have been so
complete. This solitary place was precisely suited to the requirements
of a man desirous of burying treasure. Only, might not these betraying
marks have attracted other eyes than those for whom they were made? and
had the dark and wondrous island indeed faithfully guarded its precious
secret?

0295m



It seemed, however, to Edmond, who was hidden from his comrades by the
inequalities of the ground, that at sixty paces from the harbor the
marks ceased; nor did they terminate at any grotto. A large round rock,
placed solidly on its base, was the only spot to which they seemed to
lead. Edmond concluded that perhaps instead of having reached the end
of the route he had only explored its beginning, and he therefore
turned round and retraced his steps.

Meanwhile his comrades had prepared the repast, had got some water from
a spring, spread out the fruit and bread, and cooked the kid. Just at
the moment when they were taking the dainty animal from the spit, they
saw Edmond springing with the boldness of a chamois from rock to rock,
and they fired the signal agreed upon. The sportsman instantly changed
his direction, and ran quickly towards them. But even while they
watched his daring progress, Edmond’s foot slipped, and they saw him
stagger on the edge of a rock and disappear. They all rushed towards
him, for all loved Edmond in spite of his superiority; yet Jacopo
reached him first.

He found Edmond lying prone, bleeding, and almost senseless. He had
rolled down a declivity of twelve or fifteen feet. They poured a little
rum down his throat, and this remedy which had before been so
beneficial to him, produced the same effect as formerly. Edmond opened
his eyes, complained of great pain in his knee, a feeling of heaviness
in his head, and severe pains in his loins. They wished to carry him to
the shore; but when they touched him, although under Jacopo’s
directions, he declared, with heavy groans, that he could not bear to
be moved.

It may be supposed that Dantès did not now think of his dinner, but he
insisted that his comrades, who had not his reasons for fasting, should
have their meal. As for himself, he declared that he had only need of a
little rest, and that when they returned he should be easier. The
sailors did not require much urging. They were hungry, and the smell of
the roasted kid was very savory, and your tars are not very
ceremonious. An hour afterwards they returned. All that Edmond had been
able to do was to drag himself about a dozen paces forward to lean
against a moss-grown rock.

But, instead of growing easier, Dantès’ pains appeared to increase in
violence. The old patron, who was obliged to sail in the morning in
order to land his cargo on the frontiers of Piedmont and France,
between Nice and Fréjus, urged Dantès to try and rise. Edmond made
great exertions in order to comply; but at each effort he fell back,
moaning and turning pale.

“He has broken his ribs,” said the commander, in a low voice. “No
matter; he is an excellent fellow, and we must not leave him. We will
try and carry him on board the tartan.”

Dantès declared, however, that he would rather die where he was than
undergo the 