de his way through the mob, which was continually
increasing and getting more and more turbulent, and reached the hotel.
On his first inquiry he was told, with the impertinence peculiar to
hired hackney-coachmen and innkeepers with their houses full, that
there was no room for him at the Hôtel de Londres. Then he sent his
card to Signor Pastrini, and asked for Albert de Morcerf. This plan
succeeded; and Signor Pastrini himself ran to him, excusing himself for
having made his excellency wait, scolding the waiters, taking the
candlestick from the porter, who was ready to pounce on the traveller
and was about to lead him to Albert, when Morcerf himself appeared.

The apartment consisted of two small rooms and a parlor. The two rooms
looked on to the street—a fact which Signor Pastrini commented upon as
an inappreciable advantage. The rest of the floor was hired by a very
rich gentleman who was supposed to be a Sicilian or Maltese; but the
host was unable to decide to which of the two nations the traveller
belonged.

“Very good, signor Pastrini,” said Franz; “but we must have some supper
instantly, and a carriage for tomorrow and the following days.”

“As to supper,” replied the landlord, “you shall be served immediately;
but as for the carriage——”

“What as to the carriage?” exclaimed Albert. “Come, come, Signor
Pastrini, no joking; we must have a carriage.”

“Sir,” replied the host, “we will do all in our power to procure you
one—this is all I can say.”

“And when shall we know?” inquired Franz.

“Tomorrow morning,” answered the innkeeper.

“Oh, the deuce! then we shall pay the more, that’s all, I see plainly
enough. At Drake’s or Aaron’s one pays twenty-five lire for common
days, and thirty or thirty-five lire a day more for Sundays and feast
days; add five lire a day more for extras, that will make forty, and
there’s an end of it.”

“I am afraid if we offer them double that we shall not procure a
carriage.”

“Then they must put horses to mine. It is a little worse for the
journey, but that’s no matter.”

“There are no horses.”

Albert looked at Franz like a man who hears a reply he does not
understand.

“Do you understand that, my dear Franz—no horses?” he said, “but can’t
we have post-horses?”

“They have been all hired this fortnight, and there are none left but
those absolutely requisite for posting.”

“What are we to say to this?” asked Franz.

“I say, that when a thing completely surpasses my comprehension, I am
accustomed not to dwell on that thing, but to pass to another. Is
supper ready, Signor Pastrini?”

“Yes, your excellency.”

“Well, then, let us sup.”

“But the carriage and horses?” said Franz.

“Be easy, my dear boy; they will come in due season; it is only a
question of how much shall be charged for them.” Morcerf then, with
that delighted philosophy which believes that nothing is impossible to
a full purse or well-lined pocketbook, supped, went to bed, slept
soundly, and dreamed he was racing all over Rome at Carnival time in a
coach with six horses.



 Chapter 33. Roman Bandits

The next morning Franz woke first, and instantly rang the bell. The
sound had not yet died away when Signor Pastrini himself entered.

“Well, excellency,” said the landlord triumphantly, and without waiting
for Franz to question him, “I feared yesterday, when I would not
promise you anything, that you were too late—there is not a single
carriage to be had—that is, for the three last days”

“Yes,” returned Franz, “for the very three days it is most needed.”

“What is the matter?” said Albert, entering; “no carriage to be had?”

“Just so,” returned Franz, “you have guessed it.”

“Well, your Eternal City is a nice sort of place.”

“That is to say, excellency,” replied Pastrini, who was desirous of
keeping up the dignity of the capital of the Christian world in the
eyes of his guest, “that there are no carriages to be had from Sunday
to Tues