l manufacture you a similar one when you are a
capitalist.”

“Thank you,” said Andrea; “I will let you know a week beforehand.”

They parted. Caderousse remained on the landing until he had not only
seen Andrea go down the three stories, but also cross the court. Then
he returned hastily, shut his door carefully, and began to study, like
a clever architect, the plan Andrea had left him.

“Dear Benedetto,” said he, “I think he will not be sorry to inherit his
fortune, and he who hastens the day when he can touch his five hundred
thousand will not be his worst friend.”



 Chapter 82. The Burglary

The day following that on which the conversation we have related took
place, the Count of Monte Cristo set out for Auteuil, accompanied by
Ali and several attendants, and also taking with him some horses whose
qualities he was desirous of ascertaining. He was induced to undertake
this journey, of which the day before he had not even thought and which
had not occurred to Andrea either, by the arrival of Bertuccio from
Normandy with intelligence respecting the house and sloop. The house
was ready, and the sloop which had arrived a week before lay at anchor
in a small creek with her crew of six men, who had observed all the
requisite formalities and were ready again to put to sea.

The count praised Bertuccio’s zeal, and ordered him to prepare for a
speedy departure, as his stay in France would not be prolonged more
than a month.

“Now,” said he, “I may require to go in one night from Paris to
Tréport; let eight fresh horses be in readiness on the road, which will
enable me to go fifty leagues in ten hours.”

“Your highness had already expressed that wish,” said Bertuccio, “and
the horses are ready. I have bought them, and stationed them myself at
the most desirable posts, that is, in villages, where no one generally
stops.”

“That’s well,” said Monte Cristo; “I remain here a day or two—arrange
accordingly.”

As Bertuccio was leaving the room to give the requisite orders,
Baptistin opened the door: he held a letter on a silver waiter.

“What are you doing here?” asked the count, seeing him covered with
dust; “I did not send for you, I think?”

Baptistin, without answering, approached the count, and presented the
letter. “Important and urgent,” said he.

The count opened the letter, and read:

“‘M. de Monte Cristo is apprised that this night a man will enter his
house in the Champs-Élysées with the intention of carrying off some
papers supposed to be in the secretaire in the dressing-room. The
count’s well-known courage will render unnecessary the aid of the
police, whose interference might seriously affect him who sends this
advice. The count, by any opening from the bedroom, or by concealing
himself in the dressing-room, would be able to defend his property
himself. Many attendants or apparent precautions would prevent the
villain from the attempt, and M. de Monte Cristo would lose the
opportunity of discovering an enemy whom chance has revealed to him who
now sends this warning to the count,—a warning he might not be able to
send another time, if this first attempt should fail and another be
made.’”


The count’s first idea was that this was an artifice—a gross deception,
to draw his attention from a minor danger in order to expose him to a
greater. He was on the point of sending the letter to the commissary of
police, notwithstanding the advice of his anonymous friend, or perhaps
because of that advice, when suddenly the idea occurred to him that it
might be some personal enemy, whom he alone should recognize and over
whom, if such were the case, he alone would gain any advantage, as
Fiesco17 had done over the Moor who would have killed him. We know the
count’s vigorous and daring mind, denying anything to be impossible,
with that energy which marks the great man.

From his past life, from his resolution to shrink from nothing, the
count had acquired an