ere is no
one in the world of whom I can ask help but yourself and my
grandfather, who is little better than a corpse—no support to cling to
but my mother in heaven!”

“I see that you are right, logically speaking,” said Maximilian; “but
the gentle voice which usually has such power over me fails to convince
me today.”

“I feel the same as regards yourself.” said Valentine; “and I own that,
if you have no stronger proof to give me——”

“I have another,” replied Maximilian; “but I fear you will deem it even
more absurd than the first.”

“So much the worse,” said Valentine, smiling.

“It is, nevertheless, conclusive to my mind. My ten years of service
have also confirmed my ideas on the subject of sudden inspirations, for
I have several times owed my life to a mysterious impulse which
directed me to move at once either to the right or to the left, in
order to escape the ball which killed the comrade fighting by my side,
while it left me unharmed.”

“Dear Maximilian, why not attribute your escape to my constant prayers
for your safety? When you are away, I no longer pray for myself, but
for you.”

30159m



“Yes, since you have known me,” said Morrel, smiling; “but that cannot
apply to the time previous to our acquaintance, Valentine.”

“You are very provoking, and will not give me credit for anything; but
let me hear this second proof, which you yourself own to be absurd.”

“Well, look through this opening, and you will see the beautiful new
horse which I rode here.”

“Ah! what a beautiful creature!” cried Valentine; “why did you not
bring him close to the gate, so that I could talk to him and pat him?”

“He is, as you see, a very valuable animal,” said Maximilian. “You know
that my means are limited, and that I am what would be designated a man
of moderate pretensions. Well, I went to a horse dealer’s, where I saw
this magnificent horse, which I have named Médéah. I asked the price;
they told me it was 4,500 francs. I was, therefore, obliged to give it
up, as you may imagine, but I own I went away with rather a heavy
heart, for the horse had looked at me affectionately, had rubbed his
head against me and, when I mounted him, had pranced in the most
delightful way imaginable, so that I was altogether fascinated with
him. The same evening some friends of mine visited me,—M. de
Château-Renaud, M. Debray, and five or six other choice spirits, whom
you do not know, even by name. They proposed a game of _bouillotte_. I
never play, for I am not rich enough to afford to lose, or sufficiently
poor to desire to gain. But I was at my own house, you understand, so
there was nothing to be done but to send for the cards, which I did.

“Just as they were sitting down to table, M. de Monte Cristo arrived.
He took his seat amongst them; they played, and I won. I am almost
ashamed to say that my gains amounted to 5,000 francs. We separated at
midnight. I could not defer my pleasure, so I took a cabriolet and
drove to the horse dealer’s. Feverish and excited, I rang at the door.
The person who opened it must have taken me for a madman, for I rushed
at once to the stable. Médéah was standing at the rack, eating his hay.
I immediately put on the saddle and bridle, to which operation he lent
himself with the best grace possible; then, putting the 4,500 francs
into the hands of the astonished dealer, I proceeded to fulfil my
intention of passing the night in riding in the Champs-Élysées. As I
rode by the count’s house I perceived a light in one of the windows,
and fancied I saw the shadow of his figure moving behind the curtain.
Now, Valentine, I firmly believe that he knew of my wish to possess
this horse, and that he lost expressly to give me the means of
procuring him.”

“My dear Maximilian, you are really too fanciful; you will not love
even me long. A man who accustoms himself to live in such a world of
poetry and imagination must find far too little excitement in a co