f the screw-gun battery feel inclined to eat when you
are being fired at with big guns, and Two Tails is behind you?”

“About as much as we feel inclined to sit down and let men sprawl all
over us, or run into people with knives. I never heard such stuff. A
mountain ledge, a well-balanced load, a driver you can trust to let you
pick your own way, and I’m your mule. But--the other things--no!” said
Billy, with a stamp of his foot.

“Of course,” said the troop horse, “everyone is not made in the same
way, and I can quite see that your family, on your father’s side, would
fail to understand a great many things.”

“Never you mind my family on my father’s side,” said Billy angrily, for
every mule hates to be reminded that his father was a donkey. “My father
was a Southern gentleman, and he could pull down and bite and kick into
rags every horse he came across. Remember that, you big brown Brumby!”

Brumby means wild horse without any breeding. Imagine the feelings of
Sunol if a car-horse called her a “skate,” and you can imagine how the
Australian horse felt. I saw the white of his eye glitter in the dark.

“See here, you son of an imported Malaga jackass,” he said between
his teeth, “I’d have you know that I’m related on my mother’s side to
Carbine, winner of the Melbourne Cup, and where I come from we aren’t
accustomed to being ridden over roughshod by any parrot-mouthed,
pig-headed mule in a pop-gun pea-shooter battery. Are you ready?”

“On your hind legs!” squealed Billy. They both reared up facing each
other, and I was expecting a furious fight, when a gurgly, rumbly
voice, called out of the darkness to the right--“Children, what are you
fighting about there? Be quiet.”

Both beasts dropped down with a snort of disgust, for neither horse nor
mule can bear to listen to an elephant’s voice.

“It’s Two Tails!” said the troop-horse. “I can’t stand him. A tail at
each end isn’t fair!”

“My feelings exactly,” said Billy, crowding into the troop-horse for
company. “We’re very alike in some things.”

“I suppose we’ve inherited them from our mothers,” said the troop horse.
“It’s not worth quarreling about. Hi! Two Tails, are you tied up?”

“Yes,” said Two Tails, with a laugh all up his trunk. “I’m picketed for
the night. I’ve heard what you fellows have been saying. But don’t be
afraid. I’m not coming over.”

The bullocks and the camel said, half aloud, “Afraid of Two Tails--what
nonsense!” And the bullocks went on, “We are sorry that you heard, but
it is true. Two Tails, why are you afraid of the guns when they fire?”

“Well,” said Two Tails, rubbing one hind leg against the other, exactly
like a little boy saying a poem, “I don’t quite know whether you’d
understand.”

“We don’t, but we have to pull the guns,” said the bullocks.

“I know it, and I know you are a good deal braver than you think
you are. But it’s different with me. My battery captain called me a
Pachydermatous Anachronism the other day.”

“That’s another way of fighting, I suppose?” said Billy, who was
recovering his spirits.

“You don’t know what that means, of course, but I do. It means betwixt
and between, and that is just where I am. I can see inside my head what
will happen when a shell bursts, and you bullocks can’t.”

“I can,” said the troop-horse. “At least a little bit. I try not to
think about it.”

“I can see more than you, and I do think about it. I know there’s a
great deal of me to take care of, and I know that nobody knows how to
cure me when I’m sick. All they can do is to stop my driver’s pay till I
get well, and I can’t trust my driver.”

“Ah!” said the troop horse. “That explains it. I can trust Dick.”

“You could put a whole regiment of Dicks on my back without making me
feel any better. I know just enough to be uncomfortable, and not enough
to go on in spite of it.”

“We do not understand,” said the bullocks.

“I know you don’t. I’m not talking to you. You don’t kn