id and inquiring glance which could only be
interpreted by Monte Cristo, around the courtyard, over the peristyle,
and across the front of the house, then, repressing a slight emotion,
which must have been seen on her countenance if she had not kept her
color, she ascended the steps, saying to Morrel:

“Sir, if you were a friend of mine, I should ask you if you would sell
your horse.”

Morrel smiled with an expression very like a grimace, and then turned
round to Monte Cristo, as if to ask him to extricate him from his
embarrassment. The count understood him.

“Ah, madame,” he said, “why did you not make that request of me?”

“With you, sir,” replied the baroness, “one can wish for nothing, one
is so sure to obtain it. If it were so with M. Morrel——”

“Unfortunately,” replied the count, “I am witness that M. Morrel cannot
give up his horse, his honor being engaged in keeping it.”

“How so?”

“He laid a wager he would tame Médéah in the space of six months. You
understand now that if he were to get rid of the animal before the time
named, he would not only lose his bet, but people would say he was
afraid; and a brave captain of Spahis cannot risk this, even to gratify
a pretty woman, which is, in my opinion, one of the most sacred
obligations in the world.”

“You see my position, madame,” said Morrel, bestowing a grateful smile
on Monte Cristo.

“It seems to me,” said Danglars, in his coarse tone, ill-concealed by a
forced smile, “that you have already got horses enough.”

Madame Danglars seldom allowed remarks of this kind to pass unnoticed,
but, to the surprise of the young people, she pretended not to hear it,
and said nothing. Monte Cristo smiled at her unusual humility, and
showed her two immense porcelain jars, over which wound marine plants,
of a size and delicacy that nature alone could produce. The baroness
was astonished.

“Why,” said she, “you could plant one of the chestnut-trees in the
Tuileries inside! How can such enormous jars have been manufactured?”

“Ah! madame,” replied Monte Cristo, “you must not ask of us, the
manufacturers of fine porcelain, such a question. It is the work of
another age, constructed by the genii of earth and water.”

“How so?—at what period can that have been?”

“I do not know; I have only heard that an emperor of China had an oven
built expressly, and that in this oven twelve jars like this were
successively baked. Two broke, from the heat of the fire; the other ten
were sunk three hundred fathoms deep into the sea. The sea, knowing
what was required of her, threw over them her weeds, encircled them
with coral, and encrusted them with shells; the whole was cemented by
two hundred years beneath these almost impervious depths, for a
revolution carried away the emperor who wished to make the trial, and
only left the documents proving the manufacture of the jars and their
descent into the sea. At the end of two hundred years the documents
were found, and they thought of bringing up the jars. Divers descended
in machines, made expressly on the discovery, into the bay where they
were thrown; but of ten three only remained, the rest having been
broken by the waves. I am fond of these jars, upon which, perhaps,
misshapen, frightful monsters have fixed their cold, dull eyes, and in
which myriads of small fish have slept, seeking a refuge from the
pursuit of their enemies.”

Meanwhile, Danglars, who had cared little for curiosities, was
mechanically tearing off the blossoms of a splendid orange-tree, one
after another. When he had finished with the orange-tree, he began at
the cactus; but this, not being so easily plucked as the orange-tree,
pricked him dreadfully. He shuddered, and rubbed his eyes as though
awaking from a dream.

“Sir,” said Monte Cristo to him, “I do not recommend my pictures to
you, who possess such splendid paintings; but, nevertheless, here are
two by Hobbema, a Paul Potter, a Mieris, two by Gerar