elings which were passing in his
mind. To this dumb language, which was so unintelligible to others, she
answered by throwing her whole soul into the expression of her
countenance, and in this manner were the conversations sustained
between the blooming girl and the helpless invalid, whose body could
scarcely be called a living one, but who, nevertheless, possessed a
fund of knowledge and penetration, united with a will as powerful as
ever although clogged by a body rendered utterly incapable of obeying
its impulses.

Valentine had solved the problem, and was able easily to understand his
thoughts, and to convey her own in return, and, through her untiring
and devoted assiduity, it was seldom that, in the ordinary transactions
of every-day life, she failed to anticipate the wishes of the living,
thinking mind, or the wants of the almost inanimate body.

As to the servant, he had, as we have said, been with his master for
five-and-twenty years, therefore he knew all his habits, and it was
seldom that Noirtier found it necessary to ask for anything, so prompt
was he in administering to all the necessities of the invalid.

Villefort did not need the help of either Valentine or the domestic in
order to carry on with his father the strange conversation which he was
about to begin. As we have said, he perfectly understood the old man’s
vocabulary, and if he did not use it more often, it was only
indifference and _ennui_ which prevented him from so doing. He
therefore allowed Valentine to go into the garden, sent away Barrois,
and after having seated himself at his father’s right hand, while
Madame de Villefort placed herself on the left, he addressed him thus:

“I trust you will not be displeased, sir, that Valentine has not come
with us, or that I dismissed Barrois, for our conference will be one
which could not with propriety be carried on in the presence of either.
Madame de Villefort and I have a communication to make to you.”

Noirtier’s face remained perfectly passive during this long preamble,
while, on the contrary, Villefort’s eye was endeavoring to penetrate
into the inmost recesses of the old man’s heart.

“This communication,” continued the procureur, in that cold and
decisive tone which seemed at once to preclude all discussion, “will,
we are sure, meet with your approbation.”

The eye of the invalid still retained that vacancy of expression which
prevented his son from obtaining any knowledge of the feelings which
were passing in his mind; he listened, nothing more.

“Sir,” resumed Villefort, “we are thinking of marrying Valentine.” Had
the old man’s face been moulded in wax it could not have shown less
emotion at this news than was now to be traced there. “The marriage
will take place in less than three months,” said Villefort.

Noirtier’s eye still retained its inanimate expression.

Madame de Villefort now took her part in the conversation and added:

“We thought this news would possess an interest for you, sir, who have
always entertained a great affection for Valentine; it therefore only
now remains for us to tell you the name of the young man for whom she
is destined. It is one of the most desirable connections which could
possibly be formed; he possesses fortune, a high rank in society, and
every personal qualification likely to render Valentine supremely
happy,—his name, moreover, cannot be wholly unknown to you. It is M.
Franz de Quesnel, Baron d’Épinay.”

While his wife was speaking, Villefort had narrowly watched the old
man’s countenance. When Madame de Villefort pronounced the name of
Franz, the pupil of M. Noirtier’s eye began to dilate, and his eyelids
trembled with the same movement that may be perceived on the lips of an
individual about to speak, and he darted a lightning glance at Madame
de Villefort and his son. The procureur, who knew the political hatred
which had formerly existed between M. Noirtier and the elder d’Épinay,
we