ds and a smile upon her lips.

“Valentine, Valentine!” he mentally ejaculated; but his lips uttered no
sound, and as though all his strength were centred in that internal
emotion, he sighed and closed his eyes. Valentine rushed towards him;
his lips again moved.

“He is calling you,” said the count; “he to whom you have confided your
destiny—he from whom death would have separated you, calls you to him.
Happily, I vanquished death. Henceforth, Valentine, you will never
again be separated on earth, since he has rushed into death to find
you. Without me, you would both have died. May God accept my atonement
in the preservation of these two existences!”

Valentine seized the count’s hand, and in her irresistible impulse of
joy carried it to her lips.

50275m



“Oh, thank me again!” said the count; “tell me till you are weary, that
I have restored you to happiness; you do not know how much I require
this assurance.”

“Oh, yes, yes, I thank you with all my heart,” said Valentine; “and if
you doubt the sincerity of my gratitude, oh, then, ask Haydée! ask my
beloved sister Haydée, who ever since our departure from France, has
caused me to wait patiently for this happy day, while talking to me of
you.”

“You then love Haydée?” asked Monte Cristo with an emotion he in vain
endeavored to dissimulate.

“Oh, yes, with all my soul.”

“Well, then, listen, Valentine,” said the count; “I have a favor to ask
of you.”

“Of me? Oh, am I happy enough for that?”

“Yes; you have called Haydée your sister,—let her become so indeed,
Valentine; render her all the gratitude you fancy that you owe to me;
protect her, for” (the count’s voice was thick with emotion)
“henceforth she will be alone in the world.”

“Alone in the world!” repeated a voice behind the count, “and why?”

Monte Cristo turned around; Haydée was standing pale, motionless,
looking at the count with an expression of fearful amazement.

“Because tomorrow, Haydée, you will be free; you will then assume your
proper position in society, for I will not allow my destiny to
overshadow yours. Daughter of a prince, I restore to you the riches and
name of your father.”

Haydée became pale, and lifting her transparent hands to heaven,
exclaimed in a voice stifled with tears, “Then you leave me, my lord?”

“Haydée, Haydée, you are young and beautiful; forget even my name, and
be happy.”

“It is well,” said Haydée; “your order shall be executed, my lord; I
will forget even your name, and be happy.” And she stepped back to
retire.

“Oh, heavens,” exclaimed Valentine, who was supporting the head of
Morrel on her shoulder, “do you not see how pale she is? Do you not see
how she suffers?”

Haydée answered with a heartrending expression,

“Why should he understand this, my sister? He is my master, and I am
his slave; he has the right to notice nothing.”

The count shuddered at the tones of a voice which penetrated the inmost
recesses of his heart; his eyes met those of the young girl and he
could not bear their brilliancy.

“Oh, heavens,” exclaimed Monte Cristo, “can my suspicions be correct?
Haydée, would it please you not to leave me?”

“I am young,” gently replied Haydée; “I love the life you have made so
sweet to me, and I should be sorry to die.”

“You mean, then, that if I leave you, Haydée——”

“I should die; yes, my lord.”

“Do you then love me?”

“Oh, Valentine, he asks if I love him. Valentine, tell him if you love
Maximilian.”

The count felt his heart dilate and throb; he opened his arms, and
Haydée, uttering a cry, sprang into them.

“Oh, yes,” she cried, “I do love you! I love you as one loves a father,
brother, husband! I love you as my life, for you are the best, the
noblest of created beings!”

50277m



“Let it be, then, as you wish, sweet angel; God has sustained me in my
struggle with my enemies, and has given me this reward; he will not let
me end my triumph in suffering; I wis