ondescension
or a martyrdom, while I return, more contented, more peaceful—shall I
say more poetic!—than if I had taken Queen Mab or Titania as my
companion.”

30279m



“That is an overwhelming demonstration, and you would make everyone vow
to live a single life.”

“Such are my reasons for not liking to marry Mademoiselle Danglars.
Have you ever noticed how much a thing is heightened in value when we
obtain possession of it? The diamond which glittered in the window at
Marlé’s or Fossin’s shines with more splendor when it is our own; but
if we are compelled to acknowledge the superiority of another, and
still must retain the one that is inferior, do you not know what we
have to endure?”

“Worldling,” murmured the count.

“Thus I shall rejoice when Mademoiselle Eugénie perceives I am but a
pitiful atom, with scarcely as many hundred thousand francs as she has
millions.” Monte Cristo smiled. “One plan occurred to me,” continued
Albert; “Franz likes all that is eccentric; I tried to make him fall in
love with Mademoiselle Danglars; but in spite of four letters, written
in the most alluring style, he invariably answered: ‘My eccentricity
may be great, but it will not make me break my promise.’”

“That is what I call devoted friendship, to recommend to another one
whom you would not marry yourself.” Albert smiled.

“Apropos,” continued he, “Franz is coming soon, but it will not
interest you; you dislike him, I think?”

“I?” said Monte Cristo; “my dear viscount, how have you discovered that
I did not like M. Franz! I like everyone.”

“And you include me in the expression everyone—many thanks!”

“Let us not mistake,” said Monte Cristo; “I love everyone as God
commands us to love our neighbor, as Christians; but I thoroughly hate
but a few. Let us return to M. Franz d’Épinay. Did you say he was
coming?”

“Yes; summoned by M. de Villefort, who is apparently as anxious to get
Mademoiselle Valentine married as M. Danglars is to see Mademoiselle
Eugénie settled. It must be a very irksome office to be the father of a
grown-up daughter; it seems to make one feverish, and to raise one’s
pulse to ninety beats a minute until the deed is done.”

“But M. d’Épinay, unlike you, bears his misfortune patiently.”

“Still more, he talks seriously about the matter, puts on a white tie,
and speaks of his family. He entertains a very high opinion of M. and
Madame de Villefort.”

“Which they deserve, do they not?”

“I believe they do. M. de Villefort has always passed for a severe but
a just man.”

“There is, then, one,” said Monte Cristo, “whom you do not condemn like
poor Danglars?”

“Because I am not compelled to marry his daughter perhaps,” replied
Albert, laughing.

“Indeed, my dear sir,” said Monte Cristo, “you are revoltingly
foppish.”

“I foppish? how do you mean?”

“Yes; pray take a cigar, and cease to defend yourself, and to struggle
to escape marrying Mademoiselle Danglars. Let things take their course;
perhaps you may not have to retract.”

“Bah!” said Albert, staring.

“Doubtless, my dear viscount, you will not be taken by force; and
seriously, do you wish to break off your engagement?”

“I would give a hundred thousand francs to be able to do so.”

“Then make yourself quite easy. M. Danglars would give double that sum
to attain the same end.”

“Am I, indeed, so happy?” said Albert, who still could not prevent an
almost imperceptible cloud passing across his brow. “But, my dear
count, has M. Danglars any reason?”

“Ah! there is your proud and selfish nature. You would expose the
self-love of another with a hatchet, but you shrink if your own is
attacked with a needle.”

“But yet, M. Danglars appeared——”

“Delighted with you, was he not? Well, he is a man of bad taste, and is
still more enchanted with another. I know not whom; look and judge for
yourself.”

“Thank you, I understand. But my mother—no, not my mother; I mistake—my
father intend