nation to my late dreadful alarm?”

“Madame,” answered the count, “you are under the roof of one who
esteems himself most fortunate in having been able to save you from a
further continuance of your sufferings.”

“My wretched curiosity has brought all this about,” pursued the lady.
“All Paris rung with the praises of Madame Danglars’ beautiful horses,
and I had the folly to desire to know whether they really merited the
high praise given to them.”

“Is it possible,” exclaimed the count with well-feigned astonishment,
“that these horses belong to the baroness?”

“They do, indeed. May I inquire if you are acquainted with Madame
Danglars?”

20351m



“I have that honor; and my happiness at your escape from the danger
that threatened you is redoubled by the consciousness that I have been
the unwilling and the unintentional cause of all the peril you have
incurred. I yesterday purchased these horses of the baron; but as the
baroness evidently regretted parting with them, I ventured to send them
back to her, with a request that she would gratify me by accepting them
from my hands.”

“You are, then, doubtless, the Count of Monte Cristo, of whom Hermine
has talked to me so much?”

“You have rightly guessed, madame,” replied the count.

“And I am Madame Héloïse de Villefort.”

The count bowed with the air of a person who hears a name for the first
time.

“How grateful will M. de Villefort be for all your goodness; how
thankfully will he acknowledge that to you alone he owes the existence
of his wife and child! Most certainly, but for the prompt assistance of
your intrepid servant, this dear child and myself must both have
perished.”

“Indeed, I still shudder at the fearful danger you were placed in.”

“I trust you will allow me to recompense worthily the devotion of your
man.”

“I beseech you, madame,” replied Monte Cristo “not to spoil Ali, either
by too great praise or rewards. I cannot allow him to acquire the habit
of expecting to be recompensed for every trifling service he may
render. Ali is my slave, and in saving your life he was but discharging
his duty to me.”

“Nay,” interposed Madame de Villefort, on whom the authoritative style
adopted by the count made a deep impression, “nay, but consider that to
preserve my life he has risked his own.”

“His life, madame, belongs not to him; it is mine, in return for my
having myself saved him from death.”

Madame de Villefort made no further reply; her mind was utterly
absorbed in the contemplation of the person who, from the first instant
she saw him, had made so powerful an impression on her.

During the evident preoccupation of Madame de Villefort, Monte Cristo
scrutinized the features and appearance of the boy she kept folded in
her arms, lavishing on him the most tender endearments. The child was
small for his age, and unnaturally pale. A mass of straight black hair,
defying all attempts to train or curl it, fell over his projecting
forehead, and hung down to his shoulders, giving increased vivacity to
eyes already sparkling with a youthful love of mischief and fondness
for every forbidden enjoyment. His mouth was large, and the lips, which
had not yet regained their color, were particularly thin; in fact, the
deep and crafty look, giving a predominant expression to the child’s
face, belonged rather to a boy of twelve or fourteen than to one so
young. His first movement was to free himself by a violent push from
the encircling arms of his mother, and to rush forward to the casket
from whence the count had taken the phial of elixir; then, without
asking permission of anyone, he proceeded, in all the wilfulness of a
spoiled child unaccustomed to restrain either whims or caprices, to
pull the corks out of all the bottles.

“Touch nothing, my little friend,” cried the count eagerly; “some of
those liquids are not only dangerous to taste, but even to inhale.”

Madame de Villefort became very pale, a