laimed Danglars, “I never for an instant
entertained such a feeling towards you.”

“No, you merely wished to be convinced, nothing more; but now that we
have come to so clear an understanding, and that all distrust and
suspicion are laid at rest, we may as well fix a sum as the probable
expenditure of the first year, suppose we say six millions to——”

“Six millions!” gasped Danglars—“so be it.”

“Then, if I should require more,” continued Monte Cristo in a careless
manner, “why, of course, I should draw upon you; but my present
intention is not to remain in France more than a year, and during that
period I scarcely think I shall exceed the sum I mentioned. However, we
shall see. Be kind enough, then, to send me 500,000 francs tomorrow. I
shall be at home till midday, or if not, I will leave a receipt with my
steward.”

“The money you desire shall be at your house by ten o’clock tomorrow
morning, my dear count,” replied Danglars. “How would you like to have
it? in gold, silver, or notes?”

“Half in gold, and the other half in bank-notes, if you please,” said
the count, rising from his seat.

“I must confess to you, count,” said Danglars, “that I have hitherto
imagined myself acquainted with the degree of all the great fortunes of
Europe, and still wealth such as yours has been wholly unknown to me.
May I presume to ask whether you have long possessed it?”

“It has been in the family a very long while,” returned Monte Cristo,
“a sort of treasure expressly forbidden to be touched for a certain
period of years, during which the accumulated interest has doubled the
capital. The period appointed by the testator for the disposal of these
riches occurred only a short time ago, and they have only been employed
by me within the last few years. Your ignorance on the subject,
therefore, is easily accounted for. However, you will be better
informed as to me and my possessions ere long.”

And the count, while pronouncing these latter words, accompanied them
with one of those ghastly smiles that used to strike terror into poor
Franz d’Épinay.

“With your tastes, and means of gratifying them,” continued Danglars,
“you will exhibit a splendor that must effectually put us poor
miserable millionaires quite in the shade. If I mistake not you are an
admirer of paintings, at least I judged so from the attention you
appeared to be bestowing on mine when I entered the room. If you will
permit me, I shall be happy to show you my picture gallery, composed
entirely of works by the ancient masters—warranted as such. Not a
modern picture among them. I cannot endure the modern school of
painting.”

“You are perfectly right in objecting to them, for this one great
fault—that they have not yet had time to become old.”

“Or will you allow me to show you several fine statues by Thorwaldsen,
Bartoloni, and Canova?—all foreign artists, for, as you may perceive, I
think but very indifferently of our French sculptors.”

“You have a right to be unjust to them, monsieur; they are your
compatriots.”

“But all this may come later, when we shall be better known to each
other. For the present, I will confine myself (if perfectly agreeable
to you) to introducing you to the Baroness Danglars—excuse my
impatience, my dear count, but a client like you is almost like a
member of the family.”

Monte Cristo bowed, in sign that he accepted the proffered honor;
Danglars rang and was answered by a servant in a showy livery.

“Is the baroness at home?” inquired Danglars.

“Yes, my lord,” answered the man.

“And alone?”

“No, my lord, madame has visitors.”

“Have you any objection to meet any persons who may be with madame, or
do you desire to preserve a strict _incognito_?”

“No, indeed,” replied Monte Cristo with a smile, “I do not arrogate to
myself the right of so doing.”

“And who is with madame?—M. Debray?” inquired Danglars, with an air of
indulgence and good-nature that made Monte Cristo 