e cavaliers then hastened to invite Teresa, without whom it
was impossible for the quadrille to be formed, but the young girl had
disappeared.

“The truth was, that Luigi had not felt the strength to support another
such trial, and, half by persuasion and half by force, he had removed
Teresa toward another part of the garden. Teresa had yielded in spite
of herself, but when she looked at the agitated countenance of the
young man, she understood by his silence and trembling voice that
something strange was passing within him. She herself was not exempt
from internal emotion, and without having done anything wrong, yet
fully comprehended that Luigi was right in reproaching her. Why, she
did not know, but yet she did not the less feel that these reproaches
were merited.

“However, to Teresa’s great astonishment, Luigi remained mute, and not
a word escaped his lips the rest of the evening. When the chill of the
night had driven away the guests from the gardens, and the gates of the
villa were closed on them for the _festa_ in-doors, he took Teresa
quite away, and as he left her at her home, he said:

“‘Teresa, what were you thinking of as you danced opposite the young
Countess of San-Felice?’

“‘I thought,’ replied the young girl, with all the frankness of her
nature, ‘that I would give half my life for a costume such as she
wore.’

“‘And what said your cavalier to you?’

“‘He said it only depended on myself to have it, and I had only one
word to say.’

“‘He was right,’ said Luigi. ‘Do you desire it as ardently as you say?’

“‘Yes.’

“‘Well, then, you shall have it!’

“The young girl, much astonished, raised her head to look at him, but
his face was so gloomy and terrible that her words froze to her lips.
As Luigi spoke thus, he left her. Teresa followed him with her eyes
into the darkness as long as she could, and when he had quite
disappeared, she went into the house with a sigh.

20121m



“That night a memorable event occurred, due, no doubt, to the
imprudence of some servant who had neglected to extinguish the lights.
The Villa of San-Felice took fire in the rooms adjoining the very
apartment of the lovely Carmela. Awakened in the night by the light of
the flames, she sprang out of bed, wrapped herself in a dressing-gown,
and attempted to escape by the door, but the corridor by which she
hoped to fly was already a prey to the flames. She then returned to her
room, calling for help as loudly as she could, when suddenly her
window, which was twenty feet from the ground, was opened, a young
peasant jumped into the chamber, seized her in his arms, and with
superhuman skill and strength conveyed her to the turf of the
grass-plot, where she fainted. When she recovered, her father was by
her side. All the servants surrounded her, offering her assistance. An
entire wing of the villa was burnt down; but what of that, as long as
Carmela was safe and uninjured?

“Her preserver was everywhere sought for, but he did not appear; he was
inquired after, but no one had seen him. Carmela was greatly troubled
that she had not recognized him.

“As the count was immensely rich, excepting the danger Carmela had
run,—and the marvellous manner in which she had escaped, made that
appear to him rather a favor of Providence than a real misfortune,—the
loss occasioned by the conflagration was to him but a trifle.

“The next day, at the usual hour, the two young peasants were on the
borders of the forest. Luigi arrived first. He came toward Teresa in
high spirits, and seemed to have completely forgotten the events of the
previous evening. The young girl was very pensive, but seeing Luigi so
cheerful, she on her part assumed a smiling air, which was natural to
her when she was not excited or in a passion.

“Luigi took her arm beneath his own, and led her to the door of the
grotto. Then he paused. The young girl, perceiving that there was
something extraordinary, looked at h