ver the island with the air of a man who is fulfilling a
duty, rather than enjoying a pleasure; and at the end of a quarter of
an hour he had killed a goat and two kids. These animals, though wild
and agile as chamois, were too much like domestic goats, and Franz
could not consider them as game. Moreover, other ideas, much more
enthralling, occupied his mind. Since, the evening before, he had
really been the hero of one of the tales of the _Thousand and One
Nights_, and he was irresistibly attracted towards the grotto.

Then, in spite of the failure of his first search, he began a second,
after having told Gaetano to roast one of the two kids. The second
visit was a long one, and when he returned the kid was roasted and the
repast ready. Franz was sitting on the spot where he was on the
previous evening when his mysterious host had invited him to supper;
and he saw the little yacht, now like a sea-gull on the wave,
continuing her flight towards Corsica.

“Why,” he remarked to Gaetano, “you told me that Signor Sinbad was
going to Malaga, while it seems he is in the direction of
Porto-Vecchio.”

“Don’t you remember,” said the patron, “I told you that among the crew
there were two Corsican brigands?”

“True; and he is going to land them,” added Franz.

“Precisely so,” replied Gaetano. “Ah, he is one who fears neither God
nor Satan, they say, and would at any time run fifty leagues out of his
course to do a poor devil a service.”

20093m



“But such services as these might involve him with the authorities of
the country in which he practices this kind of philanthropy,” said
Franz.

“And what cares he for that,” replied Gaetano with a laugh, “or any
authorities? He smiles at them. Let them try to pursue him! Why, in the
first place, his yacht is not a ship, but a bird, and he would beat any
frigate three knots in every nine; and if he were to throw himself on
the coast, why, is he not certain of finding friends everywhere?”

It was perfectly clear that the Signor Sinbad, Franz’s host, had the
honor of being on excellent terms with the smugglers and bandits along
the whole coast of the Mediterranean, and so enjoyed exceptional
privileges. As to Franz, he had no longer any inducement to remain at
Monte Cristo. He had lost all hope of detecting the secret of the
grotto; he consequently despatched his breakfast, and, his boat being
ready, he hastened on board, and they were soon under way. At the
moment the boat began her course they lost sight of the yacht, as it
disappeared in the gulf of Porto-Vecchio. With it was effaced the last
trace of the preceding night; and then supper, Sinbad, hashish,
statues,—all became a dream for Franz.

The boat sailed on all day and all night, and next morning, when the
sun rose, they had lost sight of Monte Cristo.

When Franz had once again set foot on shore, he forgot, for the moment
at least, the events which had just passed, while he finished his
affairs of pleasure at Florence, and then thought of nothing but how he
should rejoin his companion, who was awaiting him at Rome.

He set out, and on the Saturday evening reached the Place de la Douane
by the mail-coach. An apartment, as we have said, had been retained
beforehand, and thus he had but to go to Signor Pastrini’s hotel. But
this was not so easy a matter, for the streets were thronged with
people, and Rome was already a prey to that low and feverish murmur
which precedes all great events; and at Rome there are four great
events in every year,—the Carnival, Holy Week, Corpus Christi, and the
Feast of St. Peter.

All the rest of the year the city is in that state of dull apathy,
between life and death, which renders it similar to a kind of station
between this world and the next—a sublime spot, a resting-place full of
poetry and character, and at which Franz had already halted five or six
times, and at each time found it more marvellous and striking.

At last he ma