nti has become one of
the family, you can ask him that question.”

The carriage stopped.

“Here we are,” said Monte Cristo; “it is only half-past ten o’clock,
come in.”

“Certainly, I will.”

“My carriage shall take you back.”

“No, thank you; I gave orders for my _coupé_ to follow me.”

“There it is, then,” said Monte Cristo, as he stepped out of the
carriage. They both went into the house; the drawing-room was lighted
up—they went in there. “You will make tea for us, Baptistin,” said the
count. Baptistin left the room without waiting to answer, and in two
seconds reappeared, bringing on a tray, all that his master had
ordered, ready prepared, and appearing to have sprung from the ground,
like the repasts which we read of in fairy tales.

“Really, my dear count,” said Morcerf, “what I admire in you is, not so
much your riches, for perhaps there are people even wealthier than
yourself, nor is it only your wit, for Beaumarchais might have
possessed as much,—but it is your manner of being served, without any
questions, in a moment, in a second; it is as if they guessed what you
wanted by your manner of ringing, and made a point of keeping
everything you can possibly desire in constant readiness.”

“What you say is perhaps true; they know my habits. For instance, you
shall see; how do you wish to occupy yourself during tea-time?”

“_Ma foi_, I should like to smoke.”

Monte Cristo took the gong and struck it once. In about the space of a
second a private door opened, and Ali appeared, bringing two chibouques
filled with excellent latakia.

“It is quite wonderful,” said Albert.

“Oh no, it is as simple as possible,” replied Monte Cristo. “Ali knows
I generally smoke while I am taking my tea or coffee; he has heard that
I ordered tea, and he also knows that I brought you home with me; when
I summoned him he naturally guessed the reason of my doing so, and as
he comes from a country where hospitality is especially manifested
through the medium of smoking, he naturally concludes that we shall
smoke in company, and therefore brings two chibouques instead of
one—and now the mystery is solved.”

“Certainly you give a most commonplace air to your explanation, but it
is not the less true that you——Ah, but what do I hear?” and Morcerf
inclined his head towards the door, through which sounds seemed to
issue resembling those of a guitar.

“_Ma foi_, my dear viscount, you are fated to hear music this evening;
you have only escaped from Mademoiselle Danglars’ piano, to be attacked
by Haydée’s guzla.”

“Haydée—what an adorable name! Are there, then, really women who bear
the name of Haydée anywhere but in Byron’s poems?”

“Certainly there are. Haydée is a very uncommon name in France, but is
common enough in Albania and Epirus; it is as if you said, for example,
Chastity, Modesty, Innocence,—it is a kind of baptismal name, as you
Parisians call it.”

“Oh, that is charming,” said Albert, “how I should like to hear my
countrywomen called Mademoiselle Goodness, Mademoiselle Silence,
Mademoiselle Christian Charity! Only think, then, if Mademoiselle
Danglars, instead of being called Claire-Marie-Eugénie, had been named
Mademoiselle Chastity-Modesty-Innocence Danglars; what a fine effect
that would have produced on the announcement of her marriage!”

“Hush,” said the count, “do not joke in so loud a tone; Haydée may hear
you, perhaps.”

“And you think she would be angry?”

“No, certainly not,” said the count with a haughty expression.

“She is very amiable, then, is she not?” said Albert.

“It is not to be called amiability, it is her duty; a slave does not
dictate to a master.”

“Come; you are joking yourself now. Are there any more slaves to be had
who bear this beautiful name?”

“Undoubtedly.”

“Really, count, you do nothing, and have nothing like other people. The
slave of the Count of Monte Cristo! Why, it is a rank of itself in
France, and from the way i