y such a blow. Those who had kept
their shares, or bought those of Danglars, looked upon themselves as
ruined, and passed a very bad night. Next morning _Le Moniteur_
contained the following:

“It was without any foundation that _Le Messager_ yesterday announced
the flight of Don Carlos and the revolt of Barcelona. The king (Don
Carlos) has not left Bourges, and the peninsula is in the enjoyment of
profound peace. A telegraphic signal, improperly interpreted, owing to
the fog, was the cause of this error.”

The funds rose one per cent higher than before they had fallen. This,
reckoning his loss, and what he had missed gaining, made the difference
of a million to Danglars.

“Good,” said Monte Cristo to Morrel, who was at his house when the news
arrived of the strange reverse of fortune of which Danglars had been
the victim, “I have just made a discovery for twenty-five thousand
francs, for which I would have paid a hundred thousand.”

“What have you discovered?” asked Morrel.

“I have just discovered how a gardener may get rid of the dormice that
eat his peaches.”



 Chapter 62. Ghosts

At first sight, the exterior of the house at Auteuil gave no
indications of splendor, nothing one would expect from the destined
residence of the magnificent Count of Monte Cristo; but this simplicity
was according to the will of its master, who positively ordered nothing
to be altered outside. The splendor was within. Indeed, almost before
the door opened, the scene changed.

M. Bertuccio had outdone himself in the taste displayed in furnishing,
and in the rapidity with which it was executed. It is told that the Duc
d’Antin removed in a single night a whole avenue of trees that annoyed
Louis XIV.; in three days M. Bertuccio planted an entirely bare court
with poplars, large spreading sycamores to shade the different parts of
the house, and in the foreground, instead of the usual paving-stones,
half hidden by the grass, there extended a lawn but that morning laid
down, and upon which the water was yet glistening. For the rest, the
orders had been issued by the count; he himself had given a plan to
Bertuccio, marking the spot where each tree was to be planted, and the
shape and extent of the lawn which was to take the place of the
paving-stones.

Thus the house had become unrecognizable, and Bertuccio himself
declared that he scarcely knew it, encircled as it was by a framework
of trees. The overseer would not have objected, while he was about it,
to have made some improvements in the garden, but the count had
positively forbidden it to be touched. Bertuccio made amends, however,
by loading the antechambers, staircases, and mantle-pieces with
flowers.

What, above all, manifested the shrewdness of the steward, and the
profound science of the master, the one in carrying out the ideas of
the other, was that this house which appeared only the night before so
sad and gloomy, impregnated with that sickly smell one can almost fancy
to be the smell of time, had in a single day acquired the aspect of
life, was scented with its master’s favorite perfumes, and had the very
light regulated according to his wish. When the count arrived, he had
under his touch his books and arms, his eyes rested upon his favorite
pictures; his dogs, whose caresses he loved, welcomed him in the
antechamber; the birds, whose songs delighted him, cheered him with
their music; and the house, awakened from its long sleep, like the
sleeping beauty in the wood, lived, sang, and bloomed like the houses
we have long cherished, and in which, when we are forced to leave them,
we leave a part of our souls.

The servants passed gayly along the fine courtyard; some, belonging to
the kitchens, gliding down the stairs, restored but the previous day,
as if they had always inhabited the house; others filling the
coach-houses, where the equipages, encased and numbered, appeared to
have been installed for the last fifty