ll as you, and I have no conscientious scruples. No, it
does not concern me. You say an exterminating angel appears to have
devoted that house to God’s anger—well, who says your supposition is
not reality? Do not notice things which those whose interest it is to
see them pass over. If it is God’s justice, instead of his anger, which
is walking through that house, Maximilian, turn away your face and let
his justice accomplish its purpose.”

Morrel shuddered. There was something mournful, solemn, and terrible in
the count’s manner.

“Besides,” continued he, in so changed a tone that no one would have
supposed it was the same person speaking—“besides, who says that it
will begin again?”

“It has returned, count,” exclaimed Morrel; “that is why I hastened to
you.”

“Well, what do you wish me to do? Do you wish me, for instance, to give
information to the procureur?” Monte Cristo uttered the last words with
so much meaning that Morrel, starting up, cried out:

“You know of whom I speak, count, do you not?”

“Perfectly well, my good friend; and I will prove it to you by putting
the dots to the _i_, or rather by naming the persons. You were walking
one evening in M. de Villefort’s garden; from what you relate, I
suppose it to have been the evening of Madame de Saint-Méran’s death.
You heard M. de Villefort talking to M. d’Avrigny about the death of M.
de Saint-Méran, and that no less surprising, of the countess. M.
d’Avrigny said he believed they both proceeded from poison; and you,
honest man, have ever since been asking your heart and sounding your
conscience to know if you ought to expose or conceal this secret. We
are no longer in the Middle Ages; there is no longer a Vehmgericht, or
Free Tribunals; what do you want to ask these people? ‘Conscience, what
hast thou to do with me?’ as Sterne said. My dear fellow, let them
sleep on, if they are asleep; let them grow pale in their drowsiness,
if they are disposed to do so, and pray do you remain in peace, who
have no remorse to disturb you.”

Deep grief was depicted on Morrel’s features; he seized Monte Cristo’s
hand. “But it is beginning again, I say!”

“Well,” said the Count, astonished at his perseverance, which he could
not understand, and looking still more earnestly at Maximilian, “let it
begin again,—it is like the house of the Atreidae;19 God has condemned
them, and they must submit to their punishment. They will all
disappear, like the fabrics children build with cards, and which fall,
one by one, under the breath of their builder, even if there are two
hundred of them. Three months since it was M. de Saint-Méran; Madame de
Saint-Méran two months since; the other day it was Barrois; today, the
old Noirtier, or young Valentine.”

“You knew it?” cried Morrel, in such a paroxysm of terror that Monte
Cristo started,—he whom the falling heavens would have found unmoved;
“you knew it, and said nothing?”

“And what is it to me?” replied Monte Cristo, shrugging his shoulders;
“do I know those people? and must I lose the one to save the other?
Faith, no, for between the culprit and the victim I have no choice.”

“But I,” cried Morrel, groaning with sorrow, “I love her!”

“You love?—whom?” cried Monte Cristo, starting to his feet, and seizing
the two hands which Morrel was raising towards heaven.

“I love most fondly—I love madly—I love as a man who would give his
life-blood to spare her a tear—I love Valentine de Villefort, who is
being murdered at this moment! Do you understand me? I love her; and I
ask God and you how I can save her?”

Monte Cristo uttered a cry which those only can conceive who have heard
the roar of a wounded lion. “Unhappy man,” cried he, wringing his hands
in his turn; “you love Valentine,—that daughter of an accursed race!”

Never had Morrel witnessed such an expression—never had so terrible an
eye flashed before his face—never had the genius of terror he had so
often seen, either on 