 a fish similar to those on the table.

“But why have two of each sort?” asked Danglars.

“Merely because one might have died,” carelessly answered Monte Cristo.

“You are certainly an extraordinary man,” said Danglars; “and
philosophers may well say it is a fine thing to be rich.”

“And to have ideas,” added Madame Danglars.

“Oh, do not give me credit for this, madame; it was done by the Romans,
who much esteemed them, and Pliny relates that they sent slaves from
Ostia to Rome, who carried on their heads fish which he calls the
_mulus_, and which, from the description, must probably be the
goldfish. It was also considered a luxury to have them alive, it being
an amusing sight to see them die, for, when dying, they change color
three or four times, and like the rainbow when it disappears, pass
through all the prismatic shades, after which they were sent to the
kitchen. Their agony formed part of their merit—if they were not seen
alive, they were despised when dead.”

“Yes,” said Debray, “but then Ostia is only a few leagues from Rome.”

“True,” said Monte Cristo; “but what would be the use of living
eighteen hundred years after Lucullus, if we can do no better than he
could?”

The two Cavalcanti opened their enormous eyes, but had the good sense
not to say anything.

“All this is very extraordinary,” said Château-Renaud; “still, what I
admire the most, I confess, is the marvellous promptitude with which
your orders are executed. Is it not true that you only bought this
house five or six days ago?”

“Certainly not longer.”

“Well, I am sure it is quite transformed since last week. If I remember
rightly, it had another entrance, and the courtyard was paved and
empty; while today we have a splendid lawn, bordered by trees which
appear to be a hundred years old.”

“Why not? I am fond of grass and shade,” said Monte Cristo.

“Yes,” said Madame de Villefort, “the door was towards the road before,
and on the day of my miraculous escape you brought me into the house
from the road, I remember.”

“Yes, madame,” said Monte Cristo; “but I preferred having an entrance
which would allow me to see the Bois de Boulogne over my gate.”

“In four days,” said Morrel; “it is extraordinary!”

“Indeed,” said Château-Renaud, “it seems quite miraculous to make a new
house out of an old one; for it was very old, and dull too. I recollect
coming for my mother to look at it when M. de Saint-Méran advertised it
for sale two or three years ago.”

“M. de Saint-Méran?” said Madame de Villefort; “then this house
belonged to M. de Saint-Méran before you bought it?”

“It appears so,” replied Monte Cristo.

“Is it possible that you do not know of whom you purchased it?”

“Quite so; my steward transacts all this business for me.”

“It is certainly ten years since the house had been occupied,” said
Château-Renaud, “and it was quite melancholy to look at it, with the
blinds closed, the doors locked, and the weeds in the court. Really, if
the house had not belonged to the father-in-law of the procureur, one
might have thought it some accursed place where a horrible crime had
been committed.”

Villefort, who had hitherto not tasted the three or four glasses of
rare wine which were placed before him, here took one, and drank it
off. Monte Cristo allowed a short time to elapse, and then said:

“It is singular, baron, but the same idea came across me the first time
I came here; it looked so gloomy I should never have bought it if my
steward had not taken the matter into his own hands. Perhaps the fellow
had been bribed by the notary.”

“It is probable,” stammered out Villefort, trying to smile; “but I can
assure you that I had nothing to do with any such proceeding. This
house is part of Valentine’s marriage-portion, and M. de Saint-Méran
wished to sell it; for if it had remained another year or two
uninhabited it would have fallen to ruin.”

It was Morrel’s turn to become pale.
