 taken. Standing well
at court, whether the king regnant was of the older or younger branch,
whether the government was doctrinaire liberal, or conservative; looked
upon by all as a man of talent, since those who have never experienced
a political check are generally so regarded; hated by many, but warmly
supported by others, without being really liked by anybody, M. de
Villefort held a high position in the magistracy, and maintained his
eminence like a Harlay or a Molé. His drawing-room, under the
regenerating influence of a young wife and a daughter by his first
marriage, scarcely eighteen, was still one of the well-regulated Paris
salons where the worship of traditional customs and the observance of
rigid etiquette were carefully maintained. A freezing politeness, a
strict fidelity to government principles, a profound contempt for
theories and theorists, a deep-seated hatred of ideality,—these were
the elements of private and public life displayed by M. de Villefort.

30023m



M. de Villefort was not only a magistrate, he was almost a diplomatist.
His relations with the former court, of which he always spoke with
dignity and respect, made him respected by the new one, and he knew so
many things, that not only was he always carefully considered, but
sometimes consulted. Perhaps this would not have been so had it been
possible to get rid of M. de Villefort; but, like the feudal barons who
rebelled against their sovereign, he dwelt in an impregnable fortress.
This fortress was his post as king’s attorney, all the advantages of
which he exploited with marvellous skill, and which he would not have
resigned but to be made deputy, and thus to replace neutrality by
opposition.

Ordinarily M. de Villefort made and returned very few visits. His wife
visited for him, and this was the received thing in the world, where
the weighty and multifarious occupations of the magistrate were
accepted as an excuse for what was really only calculated pride, a
manifestation of professed superiority—in fact, the application of the
axiom, _Pretend to think well of yourself, and the world will think
well of you_, an axiom a hundred times more useful in society nowadays
than that of the Greeks, “Know thyself,” a knowledge for which, in our
days, we have substituted the less difficult and more advantageous
science of _knowing others_.

To his friends M. de Villefort was a powerful protector; to his
enemies, he was a silent, but bitter opponent; for those who were
neither the one nor the other, he was a statue of the law-made man. He
had a haughty bearing, a look either steady and impenetrable or
insolently piercing and inquisitorial. Four successive revolutions had
built and cemented the pedestal upon which his fortune was based.

M. de Villefort had the reputation of being the least curious and the
least wearisome man in France. He gave a ball every year, at which he
appeared for a quarter of an hour only,—that is to say, five-and-forty
minutes less than the king is visible at his balls. He was never seen
at the theatres, at concerts, or in any place of public resort.
Occasionally, but seldom, he played at whist, and then care was taken
to select partners worthy of him—sometimes they were ambassadors,
sometimes archbishops, or sometimes a prince, or a president, or some
dowager duchess.

Such was the man whose carriage had just now stopped before the Count
of Monte Cristo’s door. The valet de chambre announced M. de Villefort
at the moment when the count, leaning over a large table, was tracing
on a map the route from St. Petersburg to China.

The procureur entered with the same grave and measured step he would
have employed in entering a court of justice. He was the same man, or
rather the development of the same man, whom we have heretofore seen as
assistant attorney at Marseilles. Nature, according to her way, had
made no deviation in the path he had marked out for himself. From b