and drew forth a ticket; the ticket bore the name of Diavolaccio. He
was the man who had proposed to Carlini the health of their chief, and
to whom Carlini replied by breaking the glass across his face. A large
wound, extending from the temple to the mouth, was bleeding profusely.
Diavolaccio, seeing himself thus favored by fortune, burst into a loud
laugh.

“‘Captain,’ said he, ‘just now Carlini would not drink your health when
I proposed it to him; propose mine to him, and let us see if he will be
more condescending to you than to me.’

“Everyone expected an explosion on Carlini’s part; but to their great
surprise, he took a glass in one hand and a flask in the other, and
filling it,—

“‘Your health, Diavolaccio,’ said he calmly, and he drank it off,
without his hand trembling in the least. Then sitting down by the fire,
‘My supper,’ said he; ‘my expedition has given me an appetite.’

“‘Well done, Carlini!’ cried the brigands; ‘that is acting like a good
fellow;’ and they all formed a circle round the fire, while Diavolaccio
disappeared.

“Carlini ate and drank as if nothing had happened. The bandits looked
on with astonishment at this singular conduct until they heard
footsteps. They turned round, and saw Diavolaccio bearing the young
girl in his arms. Her head hung back, and her long hair swept the
ground. As they entered the circle, the bandits could perceive, by the
firelight, the unearthly pallor of the young girl and of Diavolaccio.
This apparition was so strange and so solemn, that everyone rose, with
the exception of Carlini, who remained seated, and ate and drank
calmly. Diavolaccio advanced amidst the most profound silence, and laid
Rita at the captain’s feet. Then everyone could understand the cause of
the unearthly pallor in the young girl and the bandit. A knife was
plunged up to the hilt in Rita’s left breast. Everyone looked at
Carlini; the sheath at his belt was empty.

“‘Ah, ah,’ said the chief, ‘I now understand why Carlini stayed
behind.’

“All savage natures appreciate a desperate deed. No other of the
bandits would, perhaps, have done the same; but they all understood
what Carlini had done.

“‘Now, then,’ cried Carlini, rising in his turn, and approaching the
corpse, his hand on the butt of one of his pistols, ‘does anyone
dispute the possession of this woman with me?’

“‘No,’ returned the chief, ‘she is thine.’

“Carlini raised her in his arms, and carried her out of the circle of
firelight. Cucumetto placed his sentinels for the night, and the
bandits wrapped themselves in their cloaks, and lay down before the
fire. At midnight the sentinel gave the alarm, and in an instant all
were on the alert. It was Rita’s father, who brought his daughter’s
ransom in person.

“‘Here,’ said he, to Cucumetto, ‘here are three hundred piastres; give
me back my child.

“But the chief, without taking the money, made a sign to him to follow.
The old man obeyed. They both advanced beneath the trees, through whose
branches streamed the moonlight. Cucumetto stopped at last, and pointed
to two persons grouped at the foot of a tree.

“‘There,’ said he, ‘demand thy child of Carlini; he will tell thee what
has become of her;’ and he returned to his companions.

“The old man remained motionless; he felt that some great and
unforeseen misfortune hung over his head. At length he advanced toward
the group, the meaning of which he could not comprehend. As he
approached, Carlini raised his head, and the forms of two persons
became visible to the old man’s eyes. A woman lay on the ground, her
head resting on the knees of a man, who was seated by her; as he raised
his head, the woman’s face became visible. The old man recognized his
child, and Carlini recognized the old man.

“‘I expected thee,’ said the bandit to Rita’s father.

“‘Wretch!’ returned the old man, ‘what hast thou done?’ and he gazed
with terror on Rita, pale and bloody, a knife buried in her b