t must be done. My dear count, you cannot imagine how my
mind is harassed. How happy you are in being exempt from all this!”

“Well, and why should not you be free, too? What prevents you from
being so?”

“Oh, it will be too great a disappointment to my father if I do not
marry Mademoiselle Danglars.”

“Marry her then,” said the count, with a significant shrug of the
shoulders.

“Yes,” replied Morcerf, “but that will plunge my mother into positive
grief.”

“Then do not marry her,” said the count.

“Well, I shall see. I will try and think over what is the best thing to
be done; you will give me your advice, will you not, and if possible
extricate me from my unpleasant position? I think, rather than give
pain to my dear mother, I would run the risk of offending the count.”

Monte Cristo turned away; he seemed moved by this last remark.

“Ah,” said he to Debray, who had thrown himself into an easy-chair at
the farthest extremity of the salon, and who held a pencil in his right
hand and an account book in his left, “what are you doing there? Are
you making a sketch after Poussin?”

“Oh, no,” was the tranquil response; “I am too fond of art to attempt
anything of that sort. I am doing a little sum in arithmetic.”

“In arithmetic?”

“Yes; I am calculating—by the way, Morcerf, that indirectly concerns
you—I am calculating what the house of Danglars must have gained by the
last rise in Haiti bonds; from 206 they have risen to 409 in three
days, and the prudent banker had purchased at 206; therefore he must
have made 300,000 livres.”

“That is not his biggest scoop,” said Morcerf; “did he not make a
million in Spaniards this last year?”

“My dear fellow,” said Lucien, “here is the Count of Monte Cristo, who
will say to you, as the Italians do,—

      “‘Denaro e santità,

      Metà della metà.’9


“When they tell me such things, I only shrug my shoulders and say
nothing.”

“But you were speaking of Haitians?” said Monte Cristo.

“Ah, Haitians,—that is quite another thing! Haitians are the _écarté_
of French stock-jobbing. We may like bouillotte, delight in whist, be
enraptured with boston, and yet grow tired of them all; but we always
come back to _écarté_—it is not only a game, it is a _hors-d’œuvre_! M.
Danglars sold yesterday at 405, and pockets 300,000 francs. Had he but
waited till today, the price would have fallen to 205, and instead of
gaining 300,000 francs, he would have lost 20 or 25,000.”

“And what has caused the sudden fall from 409 to 206?” asked Monte
Cristo. “I am profoundly ignorant of all these stock-jobbing
intrigues.”

“Because,” said Albert, laughing, “one piece of news follows another,
and there is often great dissimilarity between them.”

“Ah,” said the count, “I see that M. Danglars is accustomed to play at
gaining or losing 300,000 francs in a day; he must be enormously rich.”

“It is not he who plays!” exclaimed Lucien; “it is Madame Danglars; she
is indeed daring.”

“But you who are a reasonable being, Lucien, and who knows how little
dependence is to be placed on the news, since you are at the
fountain-head, surely you ought to prevent it,” said Morcerf, with a
smile.

“How can I, if her husband fails in controlling her?” asked Lucien;
“you know the character of the baroness—no one has any influence with
her, and she does precisely what she pleases.”

“Ah, if I were in your place——” said Albert.

“Well?”

“I would reform her; it would be rendering a service to her future
son-in-law.”

“How would you set about it?”

“Ah, that would be easy enough—I would give her a lesson.”

“A lesson?”

“Yes. Your position as secretary to the minister renders your authority
great on the subject of political news; you never open your mouth but
the stockbrokers immediately stenograph your words. Cause her to lose a
hundred thousand francs, and that would teach her prudence.”

“I do not understand,” stammered Lucien.

“It