 encounters a powerful opponent, he
took breath; “well, sir, really, if, like you, I had nothing else to
do, I should seek a more amusing occupation.”

“Why, in truth, sir,” was Monte Cristo’s reply, “man is but an ugly
caterpillar for him who studies him through a solar microscope; but you
said, I think, that I had nothing else to do. Now, really, let me ask,
sir, have you?—do you believe you have anything to do? or to speak in
plain terms, do you really think that what you do deserves being called
anything?”

Villefort’s astonishment redoubled at this second thrust so forcibly
made by his strange adversary. It was a long time since the magistrate
had heard a paradox so strong, or rather, to say the truth more
exactly, it was the first time he had ever heard of it. The procureur
exerted himself to reply.

“Sir,” he responded, “you are a stranger, and I believe you say
yourself that a portion of your life has been spent in Oriental
countries, so you are not aware how human justice, so expeditious in
barbarous countries, takes with us a prudent and well-studied course.”

“Oh, yes—yes, I do, sir; it is the _pede claudo_ of the ancients. I
know all that, for it is with the justice of all countries especially
that I have occupied myself—it is with the criminal procedure of all
nations that I have compared natural justice, and I must say, sir, that
it is the law of primitive nations, that is, the law of retaliation,
that I have most frequently found to be according to the law of God.”

“If this law were adopted, sir,” said the procureur, “it would greatly
simplify our legal codes, and in that case the magistrates would not
(as you just observed) have much to do.”

“It may, perhaps, come to this in time,” observed Monte Cristo; “you
know that human inventions march from the complex to the simple, and
simplicity is always perfection.”

“In the meanwhile,” continued the magistrate, “our codes are in full
force, with all their contradictory enactments derived from Gallic
customs, Roman laws, and Frank usages; the knowledge of all which, you
will agree, is not to be acquired without extended labor; it needs
tedious study to acquire this knowledge, and, when acquired, a strong
power of brain to retain it.”

“I agree with you entirely, sir; but all that even you know with
respect to the French code, I know, not only in reference to that code,
but as regards the codes of all nations. The English, Turkish,
Japanese, Hindu laws, are as familiar to me as the French laws, and
thus I was right, when I said to you, that relatively (you know that
everything is relative, sir)—that relatively to what I have done, you
have very little to do; but that relatively to all I have learned, you
have yet a great deal to learn.”

“But with what motive have you learned all this?” inquired Villefort,
in astonishment.

Monte Cristo smiled.

“Really, sir,” he observed, “I see that in spite of the reputation
which you have acquired as a superior man, you look at everything from
the material and vulgar view of society, beginning with man, and ending
with man—that is to say, in the most restricted, most narrow view which
it is possible for human understanding to embrace.”

“Pray, sir, explain yourself,” said Villefort, more and more
astonished, “I really do—not—understand you—perfectly.”

“I say, sir, that with the eyes fixed on the social organization of
nations, you see only the springs of the machine, and lose sight of the
sublime workman who makes them act; I say that you do not recognize
before you and around you any but those office-holders whose
commissions have been signed by a minister or king; and that the men
whom God has put above those office-holders, ministers, and kings, by
giving them a mission to follow out, instead of a post to fill—I say
that they escape your narrow, limited field of observation. It is thus
that human weakness fails, from its debilitated and imperfect orga