promised you.” The Count watched Albert, waving his hand to
him. When he had mounted his phaeton, Monte Cristo turned, and seeing
Bertuccio, “What news?” said he.

“She went to the Palais,” replied the steward.

“Did she stay long there?”

“An hour and a half.”

“Did she return home?”

“Directly.”

“Well, my dear Bertuccio,” said the count, “I now advise you to go in
quest of the little estate I spoke to you of in Normandy.”

Bertuccio bowed, and as his wishes were in perfect harmony with the
order he had received, he started the same evening.



 Chapter 69. The Inquiry

M. de Villefort kept the promise he had made to Madame Danglars, to
endeavor to find out how the Count of Monte Cristo had discovered the
history of the house at Auteuil. He wrote the same day for the required
information to M. de Boville, who, from having been an inspector of
prisons, was promoted to a high office in the police; and the latter
begged for two days time to ascertain exactly who would be most likely
to give him full particulars. At the end of the second day M. de
Villefort received the following note:

“The person called the Count of Monte Cristo is an intimate
acquaintance of Lord Wilmore, a rich foreigner, who is sometimes seen
in Paris and who is there at this moment; he is also known to the Abbé
Busoni, a Sicilian priest, of high repute in the East, where he has
done much good.”

M. de Villefort replied by ordering the strictest inquiries to be made
respecting these two persons; his orders were executed, and the
following evening he received these details:

“The abbé, who was in Paris only for a month, inhabited a small
two-storied house behind Saint-Sulpice; there were two rooms on each
floor and he was the only tenant. The two lower rooms consisted of a
dining-room, with a table, chairs, and side-board of walnut, and a
wainscoted parlor, without ornaments, carpet, or timepiece. It was
evident that the abbé limited himself to objects of strict necessity.
He preferred to use the sitting-room upstairs, which was more library
than parlor, and was furnished with theological books and parchments,
in which he delighted to bury himself for months at a time, according
to his valet de chambre. His valet looked at the visitors through a
sort of wicket; and if their faces were unknown to him or displeased
him, he replied that the abbé was not in Paris, an answer which
satisfied most persons, because the abbé was known to be a great
traveller. Besides, whether at home or not, whether in Paris or Cairo,
the abbé always left something to give away, which the valet
distributed through this wicket in his master’s name. The other room
near the library was a bedroom. A bed without curtains, four armchairs,
and a couch, covered with yellow Utrecht velvet, composed, with a
_prie-Dieu_, all its furniture.

“Lord Wilmore resided in Rue Fontaine-Saint-Georges. He was one of
those English tourists who consume a large fortune in travelling. He
hired the apartment in which he lived furnished, passed only a few
hours in the day there, and rarely slept there. One of his
peculiarities was never to speak a word of French, which he however
wrote with great facility.”

The day after this important information had been given to the king’s
attorney, a man alighted from a carriage at the corner of the Rue
Férou, and rapping at an olive-green door, asked if the Abbé Busoni
were within.

“No, he went out early this morning,” replied the valet.

“I might not always be content with that answer,” replied the visitor,
“for I come from one to whom everyone must be at home. But have the
kindness to give the Abbé Busoni——”

“I told you he was not at home,” repeated the valet.

“Then on his return give him that card and this sealed paper. Will he
be at home at eight o’clock this evening?”

“Doubtless, unless he is at work, which is the same as if he were out.”

“I will come again at that time,” re