ow-eyed man of five and thirty, stepped coolly towards the door and
disappeared out of the house. One after another the rest followed his
example, each making a salute as he passed, each adding some apology.
“According to rules,” said one. “Forecastle council,” said Morgan. And
so with one remark or another all marched out and left Silver and me
alone with the torch.

The sea-cook instantly removed his pipe.

“Now, look you here, Jim Hawkins,” he said in a steady whisper that was
no more than audible, “you’re within half a plank of death, and what’s
a long sight worse, of torture. They’re going to throw me off. But, you
mark, I stand by you through thick and thin. I didn’t mean to; no, not
till you spoke up. I was about desperate to lose that much blunt, and
be hanged into the bargain. But I see you was the right sort. I says to
myself, you stand by Hawkins, John, and Hawkins’ll stand by you. You’re
his last card, and by the living thunder, John, he’s yours! Back to
back, says I. You save your witness, and he’ll save your neck!”

I began dimly to understand.

“You mean all’s lost?” I asked.

“Aye, by gum, I do!” he answered. “Ship gone, neck gone--that’s the
size of it. Once I looked into that bay, Jim Hawkins, and seen no
schooner--well, I’m tough, but I gave out. As for that lot and their
council, mark me, they’re outright fools and cowards. I’ll save your
life--if so be as I can--from them. But, see here, Jim--tit for tat--you
save Long John from swinging.”

I was bewildered; it seemed a thing so hopeless he was asking--he, the
old buccaneer, the ringleader throughout.

“What I can do, that I’ll do,” I said.

“It’s a bargain!” cried Long John. “You speak up plucky, and by thunder,
I’ve a chance!”

He hobbled to the torch, where it stood propped among the firewood, and
took a fresh light to his pipe.

“Understand me, Jim,” he said, returning. “I’ve a head on my shoulders,
I have. I’m on squire’s side now. I know you’ve got that ship safe
somewheres. How you done it, I don’t know, but safe it is. I guess Hands
and O’Brien turned soft. I never much believed in neither of THEM. Now
you mark me. I ask no questions, nor I won’t let others. I know when
a game’s up, I do; and I know a lad that’s staunch. Ah, you that’s
young--you and me might have done a power of good together!”

He drew some cognac from the cask into a tin cannikin.

“Will you taste, messmate?” he asked; and when I had refused: “Well,
I’ll take a dram myself, Jim,” said he. “I need a caulker, for there’s
trouble on hand. And talking o’ trouble, why did that doctor give me the
chart, Jim?”

My face expressed a wonder so unaffected that he saw the needlessness of
further questions.

“Ah, well, he did, though,” said he. “And there’s something under that,
no doubt--something, surely, under that, Jim--bad or good.”

And he took another swallow of the brandy, shaking his great fair head
like a man who looks forward to the worst.




XXIX
The Black Spot Again


The council of buccaneers had lasted some time, when one of them
re-entered the house, and with a repetition of the same salute, which
had in my eyes an ironical air, begged for a moment’s loan of the torch.
Silver briefly agreed, and this emissary retired again, leaving us
together in the dark.

“There’s a breeze coming, Jim,” said Silver, who had by this time
adopted quite a friendly and familiar tone.

I turned to the loophole nearest me and looked out. The embers of the
great fire had so far burned themselves out and now glowed so low and
duskily that I understood why these conspirators desired a torch. About
half-way down the slope to the stockade, they were collected in a group;
one held the light, another was on his knees in their midst, and I saw
the blade of an open knife shine in his hand with varying colours in
the moon and torchlight. The rest were all somewhat stooping, as though
watching the manoeuvres of this las