ng the doctor, in a feeble voice but heartily.
“Doctors is all swabs,” he said; “and that doctor there, why, what do
he know about seafaring men? I been in places hot as pitch, and mates
dropping round with Yellow Jack, and the blessed land a-heaving like the
sea with earthquakes--what do the doctor know of lands like that?--and I
lived on rum, I tell you. It’s been meat and drink, and man and wife,
to me; and if I’m not to have my rum now I’m a poor old hulk on a lee
shore, my blood’ll be on you, Jim, and that doctor swab”; and he ran on
again for a while with curses. “Look, Jim, how my fingers fidges,”
 he continued in the pleading tone. “I can’t keep ’em still, not I. I
haven’t had a drop this blessed day. That doctor’s a fool, I tell you.
If I don’t have a dram o’ rum, Jim, I’ll have the horrors; I seen some
on ’em already. I seen old Flint in the corner there, behind you; as
plain as print, I seen him; and if I get the horrors, I’m a man that
has lived rough, and I’ll raise Cain. Your doctor hisself said one glass
wouldn’t hurt me. I’ll give you a golden guinea for a noggin, Jim.”

He was growing more and more excited, and this alarmed me for my father,
who was very low that day and needed quiet; besides, I was reassured by
the doctor’s words, now quoted to me, and rather offended by the offer
of a bribe.

“I want none of your money,” said I, “but what you owe my father. I’ll
get you one glass, and no more.”

When I brought it to him, he seized it greedily and drank it out.

“Aye, aye,” said he, “that’s some better, sure enough. And now, matey,
did that doctor say how long I was to lie here in this old berth?”

“A week at least,” said I.

“Thunder!” he cried. “A week! I can’t do that; they’d have the black
spot on me by then. The lubbers is going about to get the wind of me
this blessed moment; lubbers as couldn’t keep what they got, and want to
nail what is another’s. Is that seamanly behaviour, now, I want to know?
But I’m a saving soul. I never wasted good money of mine, nor lost it
neither; and I’ll trick ’em again. I’m not afraid on ’em. I’ll shake out
another reef, matey, and daddle ’em again.”

As he was thus speaking, he had risen from bed with great difficulty,
holding to my shoulder with a grip that almost made me cry out, and
moving his legs like so much dead weight. His words, spirited as they
were in meaning, contrasted sadly with the weakness of the voice in
which they were uttered. He paused when he had got into a sitting
position on the edge.

“That doctor’s done me,” he murmured. “My ears is singing. Lay me back.”

Before I could do much to help him he had fallen back again to his
former place, where he lay for a while silent.

“Jim,” he said at length, “you saw that seafaring man today?”

“Black Dog?” I asked.

“Ah! Black Dog,” says he. “_He’s_ a bad ’un; but there’s worse that put him
on. Now, if I can’t get away nohow, and they tip me the black spot, mind
you, it’s my old sea-chest they’re after; you get on a horse--you can,
can’t you? Well, then, you get on a horse, and go to--well, yes,
I will!--to that eternal doctor swab, and tell him to pipe all
hands--magistrates and sich--and he’ll lay ’em aboard at the Admiral
Benbow--all old Flint’s crew, man and boy, all on ’em that’s left. I was
first mate, I was, old Flint’s first mate, and I’m the on’y one as knows
the place. He gave it me at Savannah, when he lay a-dying, like as if I
was to now, you see. But you won’t peach unless they get the black spot
on me, or unless you see that Black Dog again or a seafaring man with
one leg, Jim--him above all.”

“But what is the black spot, captain?” I asked.

“That’s a summons, mate. I’ll tell you if they get that. But you keep
your weather-eye open, Jim, and I’ll share with you equals, upon my
honour.”

He wandered a little longer, his voice growing weaker; but soon after I
had given him his medicine, which he took like a child, with th