I. Strabo saw it
used for shipping; but the weakness of its slope between its starting
point, near Bubastis, and the Red Sea left it navigable only a few
months out of the year. This canal served commerce until the century
of Rome’s Antonine emperors; it was then abandoned and covered with
sand, subsequently reinstated by Arabia’s Caliph Omar I, and finally
filled in for good in 761 or 762 A.D. by Caliph Al-Mansur, in an
effort to prevent supplies from reaching Mohammed ibn Abdullah, who
had rebelled against him. During his Egyptian campaign, your General
Napoleon Bonaparte discovered traces of this old canal in the Suez
desert, and when the tide caught him by surprise, he wellnigh perished
just a few hours before rejoining his regiment at Hadjaroth, the very
place where Moses had pitched camp 3,300 years before him.”

“Well, captain, what the ancients hesitated to undertake, Mr. de
Lesseps is now finishing up; his joining of these two seas will
shorten the route from Cadiz to the East Indies by 9,000 kilometers,
and he’ll soon change Africa into an immense island.”

“Yes, Professor Aronnax, and you have every right to be proud of your
fellow countryman. Such a man brings a nation more honor than the
greatest commanders! Like so many others, he began with difficulties
and setbacks, but he triumphed because he has the volunteer
spirit. And it’s sad to think that this deed, which should have been
an international deed, which would have insured that any
administration went down in history, will succeed only through the
efforts of one man. So all hail to Mr. de Lesseps!”

“Yes, all hail to that great French citizen,” I replied, quite
startled by how emphatically Captain Nemo had just spoken.

“Unfortunately,” he went on, “I can’t take you through that Suez
Canal, but the day after tomorrow, you’ll be able to see the long
jetties of Port Said when we’re in the Mediterranean.”

“In the Mediterranean!” I exclaimed.

“Yes, professor. Does that amaze you?”

“What amazes me is thinking we’ll be there the day after tomorrow.”

“Oh really?”

“Yes, captain, although since I’ve been aboard your vessel, I should
have formed the habit of not being amazed by anything!”

“But what is it that startles you?”

“The thought of how hideously fast the Nautilus will need to go, if
it’s to double the Cape of Good Hope, circle around Africa, and lie in
the open Mediterranean by the day after tomorrow.”

“And who says it will circle Africa, professor? What’s this talk about
doubling the Cape of Good Hope?”

“But unless the Nautilus navigates on dry land and crosses over the
isthmus—”

“Or under it, Professor Aronnax.”

“Under it?”

“Surely,” Captain Nemo replied serenely. “Under that tongue of land,
nature long ago made what man today is making on its surface.”

“What! There’s a passageway?”

“Yes, an underground passageway that I’ve named the Arabian Tunnel. It
starts below Suez and leads to the Bay of Pelusium.”

“But isn’t that isthmus only composed of quicksand?”

“To a certain depth. But at merely fifty meters, one encounters a firm
foundation of rock.”

“And it’s by luck that you discovered this passageway?” I asked, more
and more startled.

“Luck plus logic, professor, and logic even more than luck.”

“Captain, I hear you, but I can’t believe my ears.”

“Oh, sir! The old saying still holds good: Aures habent et non
audient!* Not only does this passageway exist, but I’ve taken
advantage of it on several occasions. Without it, I wouldn’t have
ventured today into such a blind alley as the Red Sea.”

*Latin: “They have ears but hear not.” Ed.

“Is it indiscreet to ask how you discovered this tunnel?”

“Sir,” the captain answered me, “there can be no secrets between men
who will never leave each other.”

I ignored this innuendo and waited for Captain Nemo’s explanation.

“Professor,” he told me, “the simple logic of the naturalist led me to
discover this pa

ssageway, and I alone am familiar with it. I’d noted
that in the Red Sea and the Mediterranean there exist a number of
absolutely identical species of fish: eels, butterfish, greenfish,
bass, jewelfish, flying fish. Certain of this fact, I wondered if
there weren’t a connection between the two seas. If there were, its
underground current had to go from the Red Sea to the Mediterranean
simply because of their difference in level. So I caught a large
number of fish in the vicinity of Suez. I slipped copper rings around
their tails and tossed them back into the sea. A few months later off
the coast of Syria, I recaptured a few specimens of my fish, adorned
with their telltale rings. So this proved to me that some connection
existed between the two seas. I searched for it with my Nautilus, I
discovered it, I ventured into it; and soon, professor, you also will
have cleared my Arabic tunnel!”


CHAPTER 5

Arabian Tunnel


THE SAME DAY, I reported to Conseil and Ned Land that part of the
foregoing conversation directly concerning them. When I told them we
would be lying in Mediterranean waters within two days, Conseil
clapped his hands, but the Canadian shrugged his shoulders.

“An underwater tunnel!” he exclaimed. “A connection between two seas!
Who ever heard of such malarkey!”

“Ned my friend,” Conseil replied, “had you ever heard of the Nautilus?
No, yet here it is! So don’t shrug your shoulders so blithely, and
don’t discount something with the feeble excuse that you’ve never
heard of it.”

“We’ll soon see!” Ned Land shot back, shaking his head. “After all,
I’d like nothing better than to believe in your captain’s little
passageway, and may Heaven grant it really does take us to the
Mediterranean.”

The same evening, at latitude 21 degrees 30′ north, the Nautilus was
afloat on the surface of the sea and drawing nearer to the Arab
coast. I spotted Jidda, an important financial center for Egypt,
Syria, Turkey, and the East Indi